A Follower. Away Tybalt.
A Street.
'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
A gentleman of princely parentage,
A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
A greater power than we can contradict
A hall in CAPULET'S house
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
A lightning before death. O, how may I
A lover may bestride the gossamer
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
A precious ring- a ring that I must use
A public place.
A room in CAPULET'S house.
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
A street.
A street.
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
A villain, that is hither come in spite
A visor for a visor! What care I
'A was a merry man) took up the child.
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
ABRAM, servant to Montague.
ACT I  -  ACT II  -  ACT III  -  ACT IV  -  ACT V
ACT I.
ACT II.
ACT III.
ACT IV.
ACT V.
AN APOTHECARY, of Mantua.
AN OLD MAN, of the Capulet family.
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
Abr. You lie.
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abram. No better.
Abram. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,
Afore me, It is so very very late
After the prompter, for our entrance;
Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
All our whole city is much bound to him.
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-
All this I know; and to the marriage
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Alla stoccata carries it away. [He draws.]
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
'An if a man did need a poison now
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
An old hare hoar,
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
An she agree, within her scope of choice
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
And I am proof against their enmity.
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
And I'll believe thee.
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
And I, for winking at you, discords too,
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And all the better is it for the maid.
And all things change them to the contrary.
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
And an old hare hoar,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
And bear this work of heaven with patience;
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
And by and by my master drew on him,
And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
And do not interrupt me in my course.
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
And fearfully did menace me with death
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
And for that name, which is no part of thee,
And from her womb children of divers kind
And gave him what becomed love I might,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
And he shall signify from time to time
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
And her immortal part with angels lives.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
And here is come to do some villanous shame
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
And his to me,
And hither shall he come; and he and I
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
And let mischance be slave to patience.
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
And light thee on the way to Mantua.
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
And makes himself an artificial night.
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
And never from this palace of dim night
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
And not impute this yielding to light love,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
And presently took post to tell it you.
And private in his chamber pens himself,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
And reason coldly of your grievances,
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
And see how be will take it at your hands.
And see how one another lends content;
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
And she as much in love, her means much less
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
And since that time it is eleven years,
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
And soar with them above a common bound.
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
And soundly too. Your houses!
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
And stole into the covert of the wood.
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
And that my master slew him.
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
And that we have a curse in having her.
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
And the place death, considering who thou art,
And the rank poison of the old will die.
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
And then I ran away to call the Watch.
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
And then down falls again.
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And then in post he came from Mantua
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
And then will I be general of your woes
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
And this same needy man must sell it me.
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
And thou art wedded to calamity.
And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
And turn'd that black word death to banishment.
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
And usest none in that true use indeed
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
And where the worser is predominant,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
And with my child my joys are buried.
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'
And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
And yet I would it were to give again.
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Anthony, and Potpan!
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Apoth. Who calls so loud?
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
Are made already mothers. By my count,
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
As I intended, for it wrought on her
As I remember, this should be the house.
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
As Phaeton would whip you to the West
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
As is a winged messenger of heaven
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
As is the night before some festival
As living here and you no use of him.
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
As violently as hasty powder fir'd
As will disperse itself through all the veins
As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
At home, abroad, alone, in company,
At my poor house look to behold this night
At some hours in the night spirits resort-
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Away from light steals home my heavy son
Away to heaven respective lenity,
Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.
BENVOLIO, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
Bal. Full half an hour.
Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
Bal. I dare not, sir.
Bal. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
Bal. No, my good lord.
Bal. Romeo.
Bal. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,
Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
Because he married me before to Romeo?
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
Being one too many by my weary self-
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy
Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Ben. And what to?
Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.
Ben. But new struck nine.
Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
Ben. For what, I pray thee?
Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
Ben. Groan? Why, no;
Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?
Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt. 
Ben. In love?
Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being
Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
Ben. Of love?
Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
Ben. Romeo will answer it.
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,
Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
Ben. Soft! I will go along.
Ben. Stop there, stop there!
Ben. Strike, drum.
Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
Ben. The what?
Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
Ben. Why dost thou stay?
Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
Black and portentous must this humour prove
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
But 'tis no wit to go.
But I will watch you from such watching now.
But I will write again to Mantua,
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
But O, it presses to my memory
But Romeo may not- he is banished.
But Romeo may not. More validity,
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
But a hare that is hoar
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
But come, young waverer, come go with me.
But every man betake him to his legs.
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
But for the sunset of my brother's son
But he that hath the steerage of my course
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks. [Retiring.]
But love thee better than thou canst devise
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
But my true love is grown to such excess
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
But not another sin upon my head
But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
But now I see this one is one too much,
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
But sadly tell me who.
But send him back.
But she's best married that dies married young.
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.
But to himself so secret and so close,
But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.
But to the earth some special good doth give;
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
But when I came, some minute ere the time
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
But, let them measure us by what they will,
But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
But, soft! what day is this?
By any other name would smell as sweet.
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
By having him making yourself no less.
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
By urging me to fury. O, be gone!
CAPULET'S house.
CAPULET'S house.
CAPULET'S house.
CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S orchard.
CHORUS
CITIZENS of Verona; KINSFOLK of both houses;
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Call, good Mercutio.
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Came he not home to-night?
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Can I demand.
Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.
Cap. A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!
Cap. All things that we ordained festival
Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-
Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,
Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
Cap. Go to, go to!
Cap. Go, begone. [Exit Servingman.]
Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Cap. He shall be endur'd.
Cap. How canst thou try them so?
Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit 1 Servingman.]
Cap. Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha.
Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now
Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.
Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
Cap. Tush, I will stir about,
Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.
Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Cap. Will you tell me that?
Cap. Young Romeo is it?
Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
Chorus.
Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Citizens. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!
Cold death aside and with the other sends
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!
Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
Come, go with me. [To the SERVANT, giving back a paper]
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
Come, shall we go?
Come, vial.
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Cousin Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
Cousin Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
Despised substance of divinest show!
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. Exit.
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
Do thou but call my resolution wise
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Dost thou not laugh?
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
ESCALUS, Prince of Verona.
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Either withdraw unto some private place
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Enter ABRAM and BALTHASAR, two SERVINGMEN of the MONTAGUES.
Enter APOTHECARY.
Enter BALTHASAR, Romeo's man, booted.
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.
Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO.
Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].
Enter CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter CAPULET, COUNTY PARIS, and SERVANT - the ClOWN.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET and PARIS.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, JULIET, TYBALT, NURSE
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter CHORUS.
Enter CHORUS.
Enter CITIZENS.
Enter FRIAR JOHN.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE alone, with a basket.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS, with Musicians.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and ROMEO.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE], with lantern, crow and spade.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE].
[Enter JULIET above again].
[Enter JULIET above at a window.]
[Enter JULIET above.]
Enter JULIET alone.
Enter JULIET and NURSE.
Enter JULIET somewhat fast and embraces Romeo.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
[Enter JULIET.]
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO and Men.
Enter MONTAGUE [and SERVANTS].
Enter NURSE [and PETER].
Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].
Enter NURSE hastily
[Enter NURSE with cords, wringing her hands.]
Enter NURSE.
Enter NURSE.
Enter PARIS and his PAGE, with flowers and sweet water.
Enter PETER.
Enter PRINCE, MONTAGUE, CAPULET,  their WIVES and ALL.
Enter Prince ESCALUS with his TRAIN.
Enter ROMEO alone.
Enter ROMEO and JULIET aloft at the window.
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO,
Enter ROMEO, and BALTHASAR with a torch, a mattock
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter SAMSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers.
Enter TYBALT and others.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.
Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.
Enter a SERVINGMAN.
Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter old CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET.
Enter old MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE.
Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;
Enter the PRINCE [and ATTENDANTS].
[Enter three or four SERVINGMEN with spits and logs and baskets.]
Environed with all these hideous fears,
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
Evermore showring? In one little body
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Examine every married lineament,
Examine other beauties.
[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]
[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].
[Exeunt CAPULET and SERVINGMEN.]
[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]
[Exeunt LADY CAPULET and NURSE.]
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO.]
[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE].
Exeunt [LADY CAPULETMother and NURSE.]
[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].
[Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE and BENVOLIO].
[Exeunt all but the NURSE and Musicians, casting rosemary
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exit  Servingman.]
[Exit BALTHASAR].
[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE].
[Exit JULIET.]
[Exit NURSE.]
[Exit PAGE.]
[Exit PAGE]
[Exit ROMEO.]
Exit TYBALT [with his followers].
[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
FRIAR JOHN, of the same order.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S  cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE, a Franciscan.
[FRIAR stoops and looks on the blood and weapons.]
Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
Farewell, dear father.
Farewell, my coz.
Farewell.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Fetch me my rapier, boy. [Exit boy.] What, dares the slave
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
Find written in the margent of his eyes,
First Ser. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
First Ser. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
First Ser. You are looke't for and call'd for, ask't for and sought
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
For I have need of many orisons
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
For exile hath more terror in his look,
For fair without the fair within to hide.
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
For here we need it not.
For in a minute there are many days.
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
For it was bad enough before their spite.
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
For never was a story of more woe
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
For so he said he would. I hear him near.
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
For this alliance may so happy prove
For this night's watching.
For this time all the rest depart away.
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
For well you know this is a pitiful case. [Exit.]
For who is living, if those two are gone?
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
For you and I are past our dancing days.
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
Forgetting any other home but this.
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
Forth Ser. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
Friar J. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee. [Exit.]
Friar J. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
Friar J. Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho!
Friar J. I could not send it- here it is again-
Friar L. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
Friar L. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
Friar L. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Friar L. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
Friar L. Benedicite!
Friar L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Friar L. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Friar L. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
Friar L. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Friar L. Go with me to the vault.
Friar L. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Friar L. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Friar L. Hold thy desperate hand.
Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
Friar L. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Friar L. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
Friar L. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Friar L. How long hath he been there?
Friar L. I am the greatest, able to do least,
Friar L. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Friar L. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
Friar L. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Friar L. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
Friar L. Not in a grave
Friar L. Now, must I to the monument alone.
Friar L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Friar L. O woeful sympathy!
Friar L. O, she knew well
Friar L. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Friar L. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Friar L. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
Friar L. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Friar L. Romeo!
Friar L. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Friar L. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Friar L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
Friar L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
Friar L. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
Friar L. That's a certain text.
Friar L. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
Friar L. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
Friar L. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends
Friar L. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Friar L. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Friar L. Too familiar
Friar L. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
Friar L. Welcome then.
Friar L. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Friar L. Who is it?
Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
Friar L. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.
Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
GREGORY, servant to Capulet.
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
Give me a case to put my visage in.
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Give me my sin again. [He Kisses her.]
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
[Giving back the paper.]
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.
'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second
Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
-Good faith! 'Tis day! [Play music.]
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Good night.
Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
Greg. The heads of the maids?
Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.
Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
Greg. [aside to SAMPSON] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my
Greg. [aside to SAMSON] No.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
Have at thee, coward!
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
[He goes down.]
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
[He leaps the orchad-wall.]
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
He made you for a highway to my bed;
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
[He walks by them and sings.]
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
Help, help! Call help.
Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
Her mother is the lady of the house.
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure. [Retires.]
Here in this city visiting the sick,
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Here's to my love! [He drinks.] O true apothecary!
Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
Hie you to church; I must another way,
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. Exit.
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. [Retires.]
His son is thirty.
His son was but a ward two years ago.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
How long is't now since last yourself and I
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
How oft when men are at the point of death
How shall that faith return again to earth
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
How stands your disposition to be married?
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
I come from Lady Juliet.
I conjure only but to raise up him.
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
I do beseech thee-
I do remember an apothecary,
I do remember well where I should be,
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
I dreamt my master and another fought,
I drew to part them. In the instant came
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
I have no joy of this contract to-night.
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I promise you, but for your company,
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
I think it best you married with the County.
I think you are happy in this second match,
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
I wake before the time that Romeo
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
I was your mother much upon these years
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you note
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
I will omit no opportunity
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
I would adventure for such merchandise.
I would have been abed an hour ago.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
I'll not endure him.
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
I'll to my rest.
I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout
I- measuring his affections by my own,
If I departed not and left him there.
If I did stay to look on his intents.
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
If be be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
If ever you disturb our streets again,
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
If, rather than to marry County Paris
Immediately we do exile him hence.
In all her best array bear her to church;
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
In my behalf- my reputation stain'd
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
In such a gorgeous palace!
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
In this so sudden business.
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
In what I farther shall intend to do,
In what vile part of this anatomy
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
Is but a little way above our heads,
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'
Is death to any he that utters them.
Is empty on the back of Montague,
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
Is guilty of this lamentable chance? The lady stirs.
Is he gone and hath nothing?
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is my dear son with such sour company.
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
Is too much for a score
Is very good meat in Lent;
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
It is enough I may but call her mine.
It is my lady; O, it is my love!
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
It is supposed the fair creature died-
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
It rains downright.
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
JULIET rises.
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET, daughter to Capulet.
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
Juiet. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Juiet. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Jul. I have.
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Juliet, the County stays.
Juliet. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Juliet. A rhyme I learnt even now
Juliet. A thousand times good night! [Exit JULIET above].
Juliet. Amen!
Juliet. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Juliet. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
Juliet. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Juliet. At what o'clock to-morrow
Juliet. Ay me!
Juliet. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands
Juliet. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
Juliet. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Juliet. Blister'd be thy tongue
Juliet. But to be frank and give it thee again.
Juliet. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Juliet. By-and-by I come.-
Juliet. Can heaven be so envious?
Juliet. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Juliet. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Juliet. Do not swear at all;
Juliet. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
Juliet. Feeling so the loss,
Juliet. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Juliet. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Juliet. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
Juliet. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
Juliet. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Juliet. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Juliet. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
Juliet. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
Juliet. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Juliet. How now? Who calls?
Juliet. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Juliet. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
Juliet. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
Juliet. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Juliet. I will confess to you that I love him.
Juliet. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
Juliet. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Juliet. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Juliet. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Juliet. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Juliet. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.
Juliet. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
Juliet. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Juliet. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Juliet. Madam, I am here.
Juliet. Madam, I am not well.
Juliet. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Juliet. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Juliet. My only love, sprung from my only hate!
Juliet. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
Juliet. No, no. But all this did I know before.
Juliet. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Juliet. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
Juliet. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Juliet. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
Juliet. Nurse?
Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
Juliet. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Juliet. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Juliet. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Juliet. O comfortable Friar! where is my lord?
Juliet. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Juliet. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
Juliet. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
Juliet. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Juliet. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
Juliet. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
Juliet. Romeo!
Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Juliet. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
Juliet. Sweet, so would I.
Juliet. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
Juliet. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
Juliet. The tears have got small victory by that,
Juliet. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Juliet. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Juliet. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
Juliet. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
Juliet. To answer that, I should confess to you.
Juliet. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
Juliet. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
Juliet. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Juliet. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
Juliet. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
Juliet. What must be shall be.
Juliet. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
Juliet. What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Juliet. What villain, madam?
Juliet. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Juliet. What's he that now is going out of door?
Juliet. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Juliet. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Juliet. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Juliet. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
Juliet. Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Juliet. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
Juliet. You kiss by th' book.
Juliet. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.
Just in her case!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
[Knock.]
[Knock.]
LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
Lady Cap. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Lady Cap. A fortnight and odd days.
Lady Cap. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Lady Cap. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Lady Cap. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Lady Cap. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
Lady Cap. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
Lady Cap. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Lady Cap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Lady Cap. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Lady Cap. Good night.
Lady Cap. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Lady Cap. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
Lady Cap. Ho, daughter! are you up?
Lady Cap. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Lady Cap. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
Lady Cap. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
Lady Cap. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Lady Cap. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Lady Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
Lady Cap. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Lady Cap. O woful time!
Lady Cap. She's not fourteen.
Lady Cap. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Lady Cap. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Lady Cap. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Lady Cap. That same villain Romeo.
Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Lady Cap. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
Lady Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
Lady Cap. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Lady Cap. We follow thee. [Exit a SERVINGMAN].
Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.
Lady Cap. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Lady Cap. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
Lady Cap. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
Lady Cap. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
Lady Cap. What is the matter?
Lady Cap. What noise is here?
Lady Cap. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
Lady Cap. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
Lady Cap. Why, how now, Juliet?
Lady Cap. You are too hot.
Lady Mont. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
Lady Mont. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
[Lays down a knife.]
[Lays him in the tomb.]
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Like softest music to attending ears!
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Lucio and the lively Helena.'
MASQUERS, TORCHBEARES, GUARDS, WATCHMEN, and ATTENDANTS
MERCUTIO, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.
MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
Madam, if you could find out but a man
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
Make haste, I say.
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Making them women of good carriage.
Mantua. A street.
Many for many virtues excellent,
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
May be put from her by society.
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Mer. A challenge, on my life.
Mer. A sail, a sail!
Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
Mer. And so did I.
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
Mer. By my heel, I care not.
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
Mer. He is wise,
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Mer. I am hurt.
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was
Mer. Right.
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art
Mer. Why, may one ask?
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.
Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
Mont. Both by myself and many other friend;
Mont. But I can give thee more;
Mont. I neither know it nor can learn of him
Mont. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Mont. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
Mont. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Mont. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
Mont. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Montagues.
More fierce and more inexorable far
More honourable state, more courtship lives
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
More torches here! - Come on then, let's to bed.
Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
Most lamentable day, most woful day
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
1 Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
1. Mus. No.
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
1. Mus. What will you give us?
1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
[Music plays, and they dance.]
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
My life were better ended by their hate
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
My will to her consent is but a part.
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
[NURSE calls within.]
[NURSE goes to the curtains.]
NURSE to Juliet.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Never was seen so black a day as this.
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
None but for some, and yet all different.
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Not half so big as a round little worm
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
Now  fellow, what is there?
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!
Nurse!- What should she do here?
Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Nurse. Anon, anon!
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords. [Throws them down.]
Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,' quoth
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Nurse. Even so lies she,
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Nurse. Faith, here it is.
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
Nurse. I know not.
Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
Nurse. I speak no treason.
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Nurse. Is it good-den?
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
Nurse. Madam!
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done. Exit.
Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Nurse. May not one speak?
Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Nurse. Peter!
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
Nurse. Romeo can,
Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
Nurse. There's no trust,
Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
Nurse. What?
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
Nurse. You say well.
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
Nurse. Your mother.
Nurse. [Within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
Nurse. [within] Madam!
Nurse. [within] Madam!
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
O anything, of nothing first create!
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
O cousin, cousin!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
O son, the night before thy wedding day
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
O that she knew she were!
O weraday that ever I was born!
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones
O woful day! O woful day!
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
O, by this count I shall be much in years
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of dear import; and the neglecting it
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
Of disobedient opposition
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
Of one I danc'd withal.
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Of yonder knight?
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
On Thursday next be married to this County.
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
On the forefinger of an alderman,
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
One of our order, to associate me
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
One that you love.
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet. [PARIS dies.]
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Or never after look me in the face.
Or shall I come to you at evening mass
Or shall we on without apology?
Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Or, if I live, is it not very like
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Out on her, hilding!
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
PAGE to Paris; another PAGE, an OFFICER.
[PAGE whistes.]
[PARIS retires.]
[PARIS strews the tomb with flowers.]
PETER, servant to Juliet's nurse.
PROLOGUE
Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.
Page. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Paris. Come you to make confession to this father?
Paris. Do not deny to him that you love me.
Paris. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.
Paris. God shield I should disturb devotion!
Paris. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Paris. I do defy thy, conjuration
Paris. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Paris. Monday, my lord.
Paris. My father Capulet will have it so,
Paris. My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Paris. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
Paris. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Paris. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
Paris. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
Paris. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Paris. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
Paris. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Paris. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
Pet. You will not then?
Peter. Anon.
Peter. Anon.
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon
Peter. I will then give it you soundly.
Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
Peter. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say  for you. It
Peter. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full
Peter. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron
Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
Piteous predicament!
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
Poor John. Draw thy tool - Here comes two of the house of
Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
Prince. And for that offence
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Prince. This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
ROMEO, son to Montague.
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
Romeo and Juliet
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
Romeo is coming.
Romeo opens the tomb.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
Romeo!
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Romeo. 'Tis the way
Romeo. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Romeo. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will
Romeo. A most courteous exposition.
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
Romeo. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
Romeo. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Romeo. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Romeo. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Romeo. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Romeo. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Romeo. And bad'st me bury love.
Romeo. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
Romeo. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Romeo. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Romeo. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
Romeo. As if that name,
Romeo. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Romeo. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Romeo. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Romeo. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
Romeo. Bid her devise
Romeo. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
Romeo. By a name
Romeo. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
Romeo. By the hour of nine.
Romeo. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Romeo. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Romeo. Commend me to thy lady.
Romeo. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
Romeo. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Romeo. Farewell!
Romeo. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
Romeo. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
Romeo. For your broken shin.
Romeo. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Romeo. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Romeo. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Romeo. Go to! I say you shall.
Romeo. Good heart, at what?
Romeo. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Romeo. Good morrow, father.
Romeo. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';
Romeo. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Romeo. Here's goodly gear!
Romeo. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Romeo. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
Romeo. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have
Romeo. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
Romeo. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
Romeo. I dreamt a dream to-night.
Romeo. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
Romeo. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
Romeo. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Romeo. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
Romeo. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
Romeo. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the
Romeo. I take thee at thy word.
Romeo. I thought all for the best.
Romeo. I will follow you.
Romeo. I would I were thy bird.
Romeo. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
Romeo. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
Romeo. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
Romeo. If my heart's dear love-
Romeo. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Romeo. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Romeo. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Romeo. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
Romeo. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Romeo. Is she a Capulet?
Romeo. Is the day so young?
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
Romeo. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
Romeo. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Romeo. Meaning, to cursy.
Romeo. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
Romeo. My dear?
Romeo. Nay, good goose, bite not!
Romeo. Nay, that's not so.
Romeo. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Romeo. No matter. Get thee gone
Romeo. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
Romeo. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Romeo. Not having that which having makes them short.
Romeo. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee-
Romeo. Nurse.
Romeo. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
Romeo. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!
Romeo. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
Romeo. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Romeo. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Romeo. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Romeo. Out-
Romeo. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a
Romeo. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Romeo. Pink for flower.
Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
Romeo. She speaks.
Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
Romeo. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Romeo. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Romeo. So thrive my soul-
Romeo. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read. [He reads the paper.]
Romeo. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
Romeo. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Romeo. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Romeo. There is no world without Verona walls,
Romeo. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,
Romeo. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
Romeo. This shall determine that.
Romeo. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Romeo. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Romeo. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
Romeo. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
Romeo. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
Romeo. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Romeo. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
Romeo. Well, what was yours?
Romeo. What hast thou found?
Romeo. What is her mother?
Romeo. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
Romeo. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Romeo. What shall I swear by?
Romeo. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
Romeo. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Romeo. When the devout religion of mine eye
Romeo. Whither?
Romeo. Whose house?
Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.
Romeo. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
Romeo. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
Romeo. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
Romeo. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
Romeo. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Romeo. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Romeo. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Romeo. [ coming forward.]
Romeo. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Romeo. [to JULIET].
Romeo. [to a SERVINGMAN] 
Romeo?
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,
SAMSON, servant to Capulet.
SCENE - Verona once in the fifth act, at Mantua.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE VI.
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are
Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Samp. Fear me not.
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.
Samp. If you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.
Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
Samp. Well, sir.
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
Samp. [aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
Second Ser. Ay, boy, ready.
Second Ser. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands,
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Ser. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
Ser. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
Ser. I know not, sir.
Ser. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
Ser. My master's.
Ser. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich
Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you
1 Ser. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
Ser. To supper, to our house.
Ser. Up.
Ser. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
Ser. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick
Sev. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
Shall I send to thee?
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
Shall be the label to another deed,
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Shall have the chinks.
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
Shalt with him hence.
Shame come to Romeo!
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
She could have run and waddled all about;
[She falls upon her bed within the curtains.]
[She goeth down from the window.]
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
[She kneels down.]
[She kneels down.]
She shall be married to this noble earl.
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
[She stabs herself and falls].
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
She's not well married that lives married long,
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
- Sirrah, fetch drier logs!
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
[Snatching ROMEO'S dagger.]
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
So early walking did I see your son.
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
So far from sounding and discovery,
So fearful were they of infection.
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
So please you, let me now be left alone,
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
So stumblest on my counsel?
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Some comfort, nurse.
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
Some misadventure.
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
Spare not for cost.
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Stay but a little, I will come again. [Exit JULIET above.]
Stay not to question, for the Watch is coming.
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
Such as I love; and you among the store,
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
THE ENDTHE PROLOGUE
THREE MUSICIANS.
TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.
Take all myself.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
That God had lent us but this only child;
That I have worn a visor and could tell
That I might touch that cheek!
That I must love a loathed enemy.
That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
That I will show you shining at this feast,
That I yet know not?
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
That all the world will be in love with night
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That calls our person from our morning rest?
That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
That ever ever I did yet behold!
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
That he should hither come as this dire night
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
That idles in the wanton summer air,
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
That plats the manes of horses in the night
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
That we may call it early by-and-by.
That were some spite; my invocation
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
The County Paris hath set up his rest
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
The County will be here with music straight,
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
The hateful mansion.
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
The horrible conceit of death and night,
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
The life of Tybalt.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
The more I have, for both are infinite.
The most you sought was her promotion,
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
The only son of your great enemy.
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
The other did not so.
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
The which if you with patient ears attend,
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Then gave I her - so tutored by my art -
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
'Then music with her silver sound
Then music with her silver sound'-
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Then, as the manner of our country is,
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
These dead men's tombs.
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
They are free men, but I am banished.
[They fight. TYBALT falls.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
[They march about the stage and exeunt.]
They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
[They retire behind].
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
[They whisper in his ear.]
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
Think true love acted simple modesty.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
This but begins the woe others must end.
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
This is she-
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Thou shalt be loggerhead! [Exit 2 Servingman.]
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up; [Knock.]
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Thursday let it be, a Thursday, tell her
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [He Kisses her.]
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [He falls.]
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
Thy lips are warm!
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss. [Exit.]
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
Till we can clear these ambiguities
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
'Tis now near night.
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
To County Paris, to prepare him up
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
To Lammastide?
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
To an impatient child that hath new robes
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
To be consorted with the humorous night.
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
To bear a poison, I would temper it-;
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
To bid me trudge.
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
To have her match'd; and having now provided
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
To help me sort such needful ornaments
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To lay one in, another out to have.
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
To make confession and to be absolv'd.
To make me die with a restorative. [She kisses him.]
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
To meet her new beloved anywhere;
To merit bliss by making me despair.
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
To murther, murther our solemnity?
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
To press before thy father to a grave?
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
To rid her from this second marriage,
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
To see now how a jest shall come about!
To see thy son and heir more early down.
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
To stop the inundation of her tears,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
To this same place, to this same monument.
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
Together with the terror of the place-
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Tomorrow will I send.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
Turn from their office to black funeral-
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Two households, both alike in dignity,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Tyb. I am for you. [He draws.]
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'
Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in.
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Unto my cell.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him.
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the CAPULETS.
Verona. A public place.
Verona. CAPULET'S orchard.
Verona. FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
Warm and new kill'd.
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Was ever book containing such vile matter
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
1 Watchman. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
1. Watchman. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
1. Watchman. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
2. Watchman. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
1. Watchman. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
Watchman. [within.] Lead, boy. Which way?
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
We cannot without circumstance descry.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
We sucking on her natural bosom find;
We took this mattock and this spade from him
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
We would as willingly give cure as know.
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Were in a mask?
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
What further woe conspires against mine age?
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
What if it be a poison which the friar
What if this mixture do not work at all?
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
What is your will?
What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
What mean these masterless and gory swords
What said my man when my betossed soul
What say you, Simon Catling?
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come! [Knock.]
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!
What, have you din'd at home?
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
When it hoars ere it be spent.
When presently through all thy veins shall run
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
When well apparell'd April on the heel
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
"Where is your mother?"'
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Which craves as desperate an execution
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
Which the commission of thy years and art
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Which you weep for.
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Who is already sick and pale with grief
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will?
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
Why I descend into this bed of death
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Why should you fall into so deep an O?  [He rises]
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Will I set up my everlasting rest
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-
With instruments upon them fit to open
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
With open outcry, toward our monument.
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
With this night's revels and expire the term
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
Without a sudden calm will overset
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Would through the airy region stream so bright
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
You tallow-face!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
Young son, it argues a distempered head
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
Your lady's love against some other maid
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
a hole.
a letter?
'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a man
am a pretty piece of flesh.
an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
and a crow of iron.
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is
and all the GUESTS and GENTLEWOMEN to the Masquers.
and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! Exit.
and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
bench? O, their bones, their bones!
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of
by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than
come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
dared.
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of
ere it be out.
ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you
fairly last night.
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand
follow straight.
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that
for sounding.
for the goose.
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
for, in the great chamber.
found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath
here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears
ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a
into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold
is get afire by thine own ignorance,
it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
man to bow in the hams.
man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
master's kinsmen.
me.
me?
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
minstrel.
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
mourners, and stay dinner.
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a
moved.
much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
narrow to an ell broad!
new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall
occasion.
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
on Juliet and shutting the curtains.]
on my side.
one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
read anything you see?
reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon
[singing] lady, lady, lady.
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with another
that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
that name, for fault of a worse.
that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
the argument no longer.
the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
the two.
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
their fingers.
their heads.
then enter three or four CITIZENS with clubs.
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
this that was so full of his ropery?
thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
thumb, sir.
[to SECOND CAPULET]
to hear it.
to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
tutor me from quarrelling!
upon the prick of noon.
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
wall.
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God.
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
when 'twas a little prating thing - O, there is a nobleman in
wisely.
wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
with five or six other MASQUERS and TORCHBEARES.
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with
with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
your mother?
