Farewell, my coz.
Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Think true love acted simple modesty.
His son is thirty.
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
On Thursday next be married to this County.
I think it best you married with the County.
This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
I will omit no opportunity
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
To murther, murther our solemnity?
Two households, both alike in dignity,
Away to heaven respective lenity,
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
And I am proof against their enmity.
And thou art wedded to calamity.
But Romeo may not. More validity,
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
May be put from her by society.
Romeo. Meaning, to cursy.
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Ser. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
But O, it presses to my memory
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
So far from sounding and discovery,
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
Romeo. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
this that was so full of his ropery?
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
We cannot without circumstance descry.
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
Juliet. What storm is this that blows so contrary?
And all things change them to the contrary.
Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
[Exeunt all but the NURSE and Musicians, casting rosemary
I do remember an apothecary,
Here's to my love! [He drinks.] O true apothecary!
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!
come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
Romeo. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
I promise you, but for your company,
Is my dear son with such sour company.
At home, abroad, alone, in company,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
In what vile part of this anatomy
Juiet. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
The only son of your great enemy.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
That I must love a loathed enemy.
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
Greg. [aside to SAMPSON] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my
Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
Sev. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Romeo. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
Enter NURSE hastily
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
AN OLD MAN, of the Capulet family.
Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
wisely.
Peter. I will then give it you soundly.
Friar L. O woeful sympathy!
Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy
Romeo. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Or shall we on without apology?
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
Evermore showring? In one little body
I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Romeo. Commend me to thy lady.
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
[singing] lady, lady, lady.
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
Second Ser. Ay, boy, ready.
That we may call it early by-and-by.
Romeo. What shall I swear by?
Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
For this time all the rest depart away.
Juliet. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
First Ser. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
Juliet. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
Hie you to church; I must another way,
Watchman. [within.] Lead, boy. Which way?
Romeo. 'Tis the way
Mont. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Ben. Why dost thou stay?
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Make haste, I say.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
Lady Mont. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
Juliet. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
Most lamentable day, most woful day
O woful day! O woful day!
Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Lady Cap. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
Samp. [aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
Paris. My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
Lady Cap. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
Juliet. At what o'clock to-morrow
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
We would as willingly give cure as know.
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!
Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
'An if a man did need a poison now
Juliet. A rhyme I learnt even now
But I will watch you from such watching now.
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Romeo. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now
Friar L. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Despised substance of divinest show!
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
Enter ROMEO and JULIET aloft at the window.
[She goeth down from the window.]
[Enter JULIET above at a window.]
Paris. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
Romeo. I will follow you.
And presently took post to tell it you.
Samp. If you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.
Juliet. To answer that, I should confess to you.
Romeo. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
Lady Cap. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
Romeo. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
Friar L. That's a certain text.
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
Paris. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-
I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout
Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
Cap. Tush, I will stir about,
She could have run and waddled all about;
To see now how a jest shall come about!
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Friar J. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
Juliet. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
ere it be out.
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but
Romeo. Out-
Nurse. There's no trust,
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
Spare not for cost.
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
I'll to my rest.
The County Paris hath set up his rest
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Will I set up my everlasting rest
That calls our person from our morning rest?
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
Friar L. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
Romeo. I thought all for the best.
As Phaeton would whip you to the West
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.
Romeo. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
Friar L. I am the greatest, able to do least,
That I will show you shining at this feast,
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
Mer. I am hurt.
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
At some hours in the night spirits resort-
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Paris. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Friar L. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Romeo. Not having that which having makes them short.
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
My will to her consent is but a part.
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
Juliet. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
Romeo. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Then gave I her - so tutored by my art -
Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art
Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
And the place death, considering who thou art,
Which the commission of thy years and art
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
That I yet know not?
Nurse. I know not.
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
Lady Cap. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
For here we need it not.
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
Friar L. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
Romeo. Nay, good goose, bite not!
Mer. By my heel, I care not.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Samp. Fear me not.
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
Lady Cap. You are too hot.
Are made already mothers. By my count,
[They march about the stage and exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
And see how one another lends content;
Friar L. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
None but for some, and yet all different.
When it hoars ere it be spent.
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
Juliet. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
With open outcry, toward our monument.
To this same place, to this same monument.
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
And turn'd that black word death to banishment.
Romeo. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Examine every married lineament,
Piteous predicament!
Many for many virtues excellent,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
Is very good meat in Lent;
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
And where the worser is predominant,
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Friar L. Go with me to the vault.
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
A Follower. Away Tybalt.
Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?
and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
The life of Tybalt.
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss. [Exit.]
For well you know this is a pitiful case. [Exit.]
[Exit.]
Friar J. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee. [Exit.]
[Exit.]
With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. Exit.
Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done. Exit.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. Exit.
and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! Exit.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Romeo. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
Juliet. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
Friar L. Who is it?
Cap. Young Romeo is it?
Ben. Romeo will answer it.
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
To bear a poison, I would temper it-;
Romeo. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
to hear it.
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.
Of dear import; and the neglecting it
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
Paris. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
First Ser. You are looke't for and call'd for, ask't for and sought
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
I dreamt my master and another fought,
Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!
Romeo. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
It rains downright.
Would through the airy region stream so bright
Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
Of yonder knight?
Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
Friar L. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
I have no joy of this contract to-night.
'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
Romeo. I dreamt a dream to-night.
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
Juliet. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
Came he not home to-night?
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
fairly last night.
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
To be consorted with the humorous night.
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
At my poor house look to behold this night
'Tis now near night.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
Juliet. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
And never from this palace of dim night
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
And makes himself an artificial night.
That all the world will be in love with night
Friar L. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
That he should hither come as this dire night
That plats the manes of horses in the night
Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Good night.
Lady Cap. Good night.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
Romeo. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
follow straight.
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
The County will be here with music straight,
Mer. Right.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Friar L. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Without a sudden calm will overset
Juliet. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
Romeo. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
Either be gone before the watch be set,
There shall no figure at such rate be set
TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.
GREGORY, servant to Capulet.
SAMSON, servant to Capulet.
JULIET, daughter to Capulet.
LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Romeo. Is she a Capulet?
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE alone, with a basket.
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
I come from Lady Juliet.
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
NURSE to Juliet.
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
Romeo and Juliet
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Lady Cap. Why, how now, Juliet?
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
By any other name would smell as sweet.
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
A street.
Mantua. A street.
A street.
A Street.
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
A greater power than we can contradict
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
Friar L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt. 
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
1 Ser. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
Romeo. Good heart, at what?
Ben. The what?
Juliet. The tears have got small victory by that,
Romeo. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Juliet. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Romeo. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
Romeo. This shall determine that.
Cap. Will you tell me that?
Nurse. What?
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Peter. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say  for you. It
Forth Ser. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
Juliet, the County stays.
Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
For in a minute there are many days.
For you and I are past our dancing days.
Lady Cap. A fortnight and odd days.
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
Alla stoccata carries it away. [He draws.]
Tyb. I am for you. [He draws.]
Chorus.
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
Juliet. Can heaven be so envious?
Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
Juliet. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
1. Mus. What will you give us?
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
If I did stay to look on his intents.
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
To help me sort such needful ornaments
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.
[Enter three or four SERVINGMEN with spits and logs and baskets.]
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Juliet. Feeling so the loss,
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
Friar L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
In this so sudden business.
Romeo. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Romeo. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
By having him making yourself no less.
And she as much in love, her means much less
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
But my true love is grown to such excess
Being held a foe, he may not have access
Or shall I come to you at evening mass
Romeo. Well, what was yours?
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
Is guilty of this lamentable chance? The lady stirs.
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
Exit TYBALT [with his followers].
[PARIS strews the tomb with flowers.]
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
and all the GUESTS and GENTLEWOMEN to the Masquers.
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Enter SAMSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers.
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
Enter TYBALT and others.
their fingers.
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
Romeo. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
Cousin Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
O, by this count I shall be much in years
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
And since that time it is eleven years,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
I was your mother much upon these years
To stop the inundation of her tears,
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Friar L. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Like softest music to attending ears!
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
Friar L. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
For I have need of many orisons
Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
[FRIAR stoops and looks on the blood and weapons.]
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
As will disperse itself through all the veins
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
[NURSE goes to the curtains.]
[She falls upon her bed within the curtains.]
on Juliet and shutting the curtains.]
As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Romeo. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS, with Musicians.
Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
man to bow in the hams.
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
Romeo. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Romeo. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
Romeo. There is no world without Verona walls,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [He falls.]
[She stabs herself and falls].
[They fight. TYBALT falls.]
Juliet. How now? Who calls?
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
Shall have the chinks.
Lady Cap. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
Romeo. She speaks.
If, rather than to marry County Paris
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
Juliet. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
Romeo. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Forgetting any other home but this.
Romeo. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
But, soft! what day is this?
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
Never was seen so black a day as this.
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Juliet. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
Then, as the manner of our country is,
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is
Nurse. Faith, here it is.
Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
Romeo. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
- Sirrah, fetch drier logs!
Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
[He walks by them and sings.]
Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
But every man betake him to his legs.
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
Find written in the margent of his eyes,
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Romeo. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.
Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
And her immortal part with angels lives.
Lady Cap. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
More honourable state, more courtship lives
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
Romeo. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
Montagues.
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
[PAGE whistes.]
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
And soundly too. Your houses!
CITIZENS of Verona; KINSFOLK of both houses;
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Why should you fall into so deep an O?  [He rises]
JULIET rises.
[PARIS retires.]
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. [Retires.]
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure. [Retires.]
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
And then will I be general of your woes
Romeo. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Romeo. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones
bench? O, their bones, their bones!
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
Examine other beauties.
Till we can clear these ambiguities
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
Juliet. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
Drawn with a team of little atomies
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet. [PARIS dies.]
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
Juliet. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
And reason coldly of your grievances,
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
To an impatient child that hath new robes
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
What mean these masterless and gory swords
Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Prince. This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Juliet. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Juliet. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Cold death aside and with the other sends
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends
Juliet. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Juliet. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Second Ser. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands,
And see how be will take it at your hands.
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
[Enter NURSE with cords, wringing her hands.]
Greg. The heads of the maids?
Juliet. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Is but a little way above our heads,
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
their heads.
then enter three or four CITIZENS with clubs.
These dead men's tombs.
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Ser. My master's.
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Bal. Full half an hour.
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
Juliet. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
Romeo. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
Juliet. What's he that now is going out of door?
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
Which you weep for.
Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Ser. I know not, sir.
Bal. I dare not, sir.
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
Cousin Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
Abram. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Samp. Well, sir.
Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
thumb, sir.
Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
To merit bliss by making me despair.
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
That idles in the wanton summer air,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
Romeo. Pink for flower.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Lady Cap. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
a letter?
Abram. No better.
Was ever book containing such vile matter
Lady Cap. What is the matter?
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Nurse. Peter!
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
Enter PARIS and his PAGE, with flowers and sweet water.
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read. [He reads the paper.]
[Giving back the paper.]
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
Come, go with me. [To the SERVANT, giving back a paper]
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
mourners, and stay dinner.
A lover may bestride the gossamer
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with another
Juliet. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
"Where is your mother?"'
your mother?
Nurse. Your mother.
Romeo. What is her mother?
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Romeo. Whither?
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Romeo. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Paris. Come you to make confession to this father?
This letter he early bid me give his father,
Farewell, dear father.
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Romeo. Good morrow, father.
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
Give me my sin again. [He Kisses her.]
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [He Kisses her.]
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
As I intended, for it wrought on her
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Thursday let it be, a Thursday, tell her
Romeo. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
And that we have a curse in having her.
Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
the argument no longer.
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger
Juliet. Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
[Snatching ROMEO'S dagger.]
it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
FRIAR JOHN, of the same order.
Juliet. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
for, in the great chamber.
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET'S chamber.
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
But a hare that is hoar
And an old hare hoar,
An old hare hoar,
Romeo. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
What if it be a poison which the friar
Friar L. Too familiar
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
More fierce and more inexorable far
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
For so he said he would. I hear him near.
Romeo. Here's goodly gear!
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
Juliet. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
Romeo. My dear?
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
[They whisper in his ear.]
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
Lady Cap. Ho, daughter! are you up?
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
Romeo. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
Lady Cap. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Help, help! Call help.
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
Romeo. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Ser. Up.
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
the two.
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
Ben. And what to?
Cap. Go to, go to!
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!
Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Romeo. Nay, that's not so.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
The other did not so.
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Paris. My father Capulet will have it so,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
Cap. How canst thou try them so?
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Juliet. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
Paris. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.
Romeo. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
And I, for winking at you, discords too,
Juliet. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
1. Watchman. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
If be be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
Ben. Groan? Why, no;
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Call, good Mercutio.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
But sadly tell me who.
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
Friar J. Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho!
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
His son was but a ward two years ago.
I would have been abed an hour ago.
But 'tis no wit to go.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
Come, shall we go?
Mont. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
Juliet. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
I wake before the time that Romeo
Juliet. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
Enter JULIET somewhat fast and embraces Romeo.
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
Shame come to Romeo!
Romeo!
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
MERCUTIO, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.
BENVOLIO, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo
Friar L. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Lady Cap. That same villain Romeo.
Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Juliet. Romeo!
Romeo?
Bal. Romeo.
Friar L. Romeo!
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
In what I farther shall intend to do,
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
Greg. [aside to SAMSON] No.
Romeo. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
1. Mus. No.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
Romeo. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
To see thy son and heir more early down.
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
[She kneels down.]
[She kneels down.]
[He goes down.]
Citizens. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!
Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords. [Throws them down.]
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
I- measuring his affections by my own,
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.
Ser. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
Juliet. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
When presently through all thy veins shall run
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
Page. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.
Lady Cap. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
Romeo. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
O weraday that ever I was born!
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Nurse. I speak no treason.
Away from light steals home my heavy son
But for the sunset of my brother's son
So early walking did I see your son.
Peter. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron
Romeo. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
and a crow of iron.
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon
should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon
Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
upon the prick of noon.
Juliet. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Nurse. Anon, anon!
Peter. Anon.
Peter. Anon.
Which craves as desperate an execution
Paris. God shield I should disturb devotion!
The most you sought was her promotion,
Romeo. A most courteous exposition.
Of disobedient opposition
So fearful were they of infection.
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Paris. I do defy thy, conjuration
That were some spite; my invocation
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.
The hateful mansion.
Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
occasion.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
O cousin, cousin!
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
Juliet. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
[NURSE calls within.]
Juliet. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Romeo. For your broken shin.
Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
Which are the children of an idle brain,
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
1. Watchman. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
Romeo. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
Juliet. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
Juliet. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
And then down falls again.
Friar J. I could not send it- here it is again-
Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
[Enter JULIET above again].
And yet I would it were to give again.
Romeo. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
Juliet. But to be frank and give it thee again.
That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;
Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in.
when 'twas a little prating thing - O, there is a nobleman in
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
Give me a case to put my visage in.
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
Friar L. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Ser. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
With instruments upon them fit to open
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
master's kinsmen.
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Juliet. Amen!
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
Pet. You will not then?
Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Friar L. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
Juliet. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
Friar L. Welcome then.
And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Lady Cap. She's not fourteen.
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
Mont. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been
Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
Nurse. Is it good-den?
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO and Men.
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
Anthony, and Potpan!
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Cap. Go, begone. [Exit Servingman.]
Thou shalt be loggerhead! [Exit 2 Servingman.]
Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit 1 Servingman.]
[Exit  Servingman.]
'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
Lady Cap. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
Juliet. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
1. Watchman. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Friar L. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
Madam, if you could find out but a man
one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a man
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
Lady Cap. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
FRIAR LAURENCE, a Franciscan.
Romeo. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
Nurse. Romeo can,
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
Ben. Strike, drum.
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Not half so big as a round little worm
With this night's revels and expire the term
Thy lips are warm!
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
Romeo. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
Romeo. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
And that my master slew him.
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
To make me die with a restorative. [She kisses him.]
Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
I conjure only but to raise up him.
To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
All our whole city is much bound to him.
And by and by my master drew on him,
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
We took this mattock and this spade from him
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Friar L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
Mont. I neither know it nor can learn of him
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
As living here and you no use of him.
Juliet. I will confess to you that I love him.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
I'll not endure him.
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
Is death to any he that utters them.
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
Juliet. What villain, madam?
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Nurse. [within] Madam!
Nurse. [within] Madam!
Nurse. Madam!
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
Romeo. So thrive my soul-
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
What said my man when my betossed soul
Paris. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
She shall be married to this noble earl.
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
Peter. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full
Romeo. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
But, let them measure us by what they will,
Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Romeo. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,
What is your will?
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will?
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
Romeo. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Romeo. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
Bal. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Romeo. Farewell!
Farewell.
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
Nurse. You say well.
Friar L. O, she knew well
Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Juliet. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Juliet. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Juliet. Madam, I am not well.
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
That I have worn a visor and could tell
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Unto my cell.
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
Verona. FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
Juliet. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
FRIAR LAURENCE'S  cell.
Lady Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
[He leaps the orchad-wall.]
Romeo. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
wall.
Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall
Romeo. Go to! I say you shall.
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Juliet. Do not swear at all;
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Mer. A sail, a sail!
So stumblest on my counsel?
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
minstrel.
Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
When well apparell'd April on the heel
Romeo. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
As is the night before some festival
Cap. All things that we ordained festival
Turn from their office to black funeral-
Come, vial.
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
Of one I danc'd withal.
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Were in a mask?
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Mer. Why, may one ask?
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Juliet. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
For exile hath more terror in his look,
First Ser. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
Juliet. You kiss by th' book.
Friar L. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
That I might touch that cheek!
Enter ROMEO, and BALTHASAR with a torch, a mattock
[Knock.]
[Knock.]
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up; [Knock.]
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come! [Knock.]
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
Here in this city visiting the sick,
Ser. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
But send him back.
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Nurse. May not one speak?
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Friar L. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
How shall that faith return again to earth
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,' quoth
Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
Friar L. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Juliet. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
Romeo. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Lady Cap. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
Paris. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Lady Cap. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
And fearfully did menace me with death
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
How oft when men are at the point of death
Why I descend into this bed of death
Romeo. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
am a pretty piece of flesh.
Romeo. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
Dost thou not laugh?
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
Juliet. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
Juliet. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
But now I see this one is one too much,
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Romeo. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
I think you are happy in this second match,
Romeo. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
And then I ran away to call the Watch.
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.
In all her best array bear her to church;
Friar L. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
Ser. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
Mont. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
Romeo. Is the day so young?
'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
But she's best married that dies married young.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
Ben. Soft! I will go along.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
Romeo. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
She's not well married that lives married long,
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks. [Retiring.]
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
Romeo is coming.
Stay not to question, for the Watch is coming.
What say you, Simon Catling?
tutor me from quarrelling!
Romeo. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
Is he gone and hath nothing?
Thou talk'st of nothing.
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
For this night's watching.
Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being
for sounding.
Out on her, hilding!
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
Paris. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of
found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of
Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of
Poor John. Draw thy tool - Here comes two of the house of
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
Take all myself.
They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Friar L. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Lady Cap. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Being one too many by my weary self-
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
Friar L. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
Who is already sick and pale with grief
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Romeo. When the devout religion of mine eye
Romeo. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Romeo. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
For this alliance may so happy prove
Black and portentous must this humour prove
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Juliet. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
Romeo. And bad'st me bury love.
Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
It is my lady; O, it is my love!
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.
Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
One that you love.
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
And not impute this yielding to light love,
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Romeo. If my heart's dear love-
Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Ben. In love?
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Ben. Of love?
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
Romeo. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Stay but a little, I will come again. [Exit JULIET above.]
Juliet. A thousand times good night! [Exit JULIET above].
[Enter JULIET above.]
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
But to the earth some special good doth give;
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
To press before thy father to a grave?
Friar L. Not in a grave
Fetch me my rapier, boy. [Exit boy.] What, dares the slave
Juliet. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Romeo. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have
To lay one in, another out to have.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
Jul. I have.
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Romeo. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Juliet. Blister'd be thy tongue
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Paris. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
ABRAM, servant to Montague.
ROMEO, son to Montague.
LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
Is empty on the back of Montague,
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
Lady Cap. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Romeo. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you note
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
For it was bad enough before their spite.
A villain, that is hither come in spite
The more I have, for both are infinite.
Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
Friar L. Benedicite!
Friar L. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Friar L. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Afore me, It is so very very late
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Juliet. My only love, sprung from my only hate!
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
My life were better ended by their hate
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
O anything, of nothing first create!
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Ser. To supper, to our house.
Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
Romeo. Whose house?
Her mother is the lady of the house.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Suspecting that we both were in a house
CAPULET'S house.
A room in CAPULET'S house.
A hall in CAPULET'S house
CAPULET'S house.
CAPULET'S house.
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
A precious ring- a ring that I must use
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
But he that hath the steerage of my course
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
PETER, servant to Juliet's nurse.
Romeo. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Juliet. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
Some comfort, nurse.
Lady Cap. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Juliet. Nurse?
Romeo. Nurse.
that name, for fault of a worse.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
Romeo. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
for the goose.
goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
But to himself so secret and so close,
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
Mer. He is wise,
Do thou but call my resolution wise
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Romeo. Bid her devise
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
I would adventure for such merchandise.
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
Just in her case!
Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Some misadventure.
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Such as I love; and you among the store,
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
Mont. But I can give thee more;
Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
Juliet. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Juliet. No, no. But all this did I know before.
Romeo. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Is too much for a score
Romeo. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
O that she knew she were!
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
To meet her new beloved anywhere;
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
Now  fellow, what is there?
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Ben. Stop there, stop there!
Friar L. How long hath he been there?
If I departed not and left him there.
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
Juliet. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Romeo. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
Romeo. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Romeo. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Lady Cap. What noise is here?
Friar L. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Nurse!- What should she do here?
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Juliet. Madam, I am here.
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
Juliet. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are
Friar L. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
For never was a story of more woe
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
Lady Mont. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
Friar L. Now, must I to the monument alone.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Enter JULIET alone.
Enter ROMEO alone.
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
Romeo. No matter. Get thee gone
Juliet. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
By urging me to fury. O, be gone!
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
Ben. But new struck nine.
Romeo. By the hour of nine.
Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Romeo. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
It is enough I may but call her mine.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
Friar L. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
Friar L. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Romeo. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
What, have you din'd at home?
A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
me?
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Juliet. By-and-by I come.-
Juiet. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,
Lady Cap. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
And he shall signify from time to time
Lady Cap. O woful time!
But when I came, some minute ere the time
here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
Lady Cap. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
Romeo. As if that name,
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
Romeo. By a name
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
And here is come to do some villanous shame
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
I drew to part them. In the instant came
Juliet. Ay me!
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
And this same needy man must sell it me.
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
And his to me,
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
Lady Cap. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
Friar L. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
Romeo. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Romeo. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
But come, young waverer, come go with me.
Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
Or manage it to part these men with me.
me.
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
Paris. Do not deny to him that you love me.
Paris. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me
One of our order, to associate me
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
a hole.
Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Lady Cap. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Romeo. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Or, if I live, is it not very like
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
Abr. You lie.
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
And the rank poison of the old will die.
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the
Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
Romeo. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the
Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
This is she-
Nurse. Even so lies she,
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
To bid me trudge.
Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
A gentleman of princely parentage,
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
All this I know; and to the marriage
To rid her from this second marriage,
Making them women of good carriage.
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
What further woe conspires against mine age?
Paris. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
Juliet. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
[Lays down a knife.]
Mer. A challenge, on my life.
Lady Cap. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
read anything you see?
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Ben. For what, I pray thee?
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Juliet. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee-
Because it is an enemy to thee.
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Shall I send to thee?
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
Juliet. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
Romeo. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
I do beseech thee-
And for that name, which is no part of thee,
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Romeo. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
And I'll believe thee.
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Romeo. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!
To Lammastide?
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,
on my side.
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
Let two more summers wither in their pride
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
Romeo. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
For fair without the fair within to hide.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE], with lantern, crow and spade.
Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
Juliet. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
And let mischance be slave to patience.
And bear this work of heaven with patience;
Bal. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
Shalt with him hence.
Immediately we do exile him hence.
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
Prince. And for that offence
And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
After the prompter, for our entrance;
is get afire by thine own ignorance,
[Music plays, and they dance.]
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Juliet. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
Juliet. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Either withdraw unto some private place
Together with the terror of the place-
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Verona. A public place.
A public place.
In such a gorgeous palace!
You tallow-face!
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
Juliet. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Romeo. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Juliet. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Or never after look me in the face.
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Lady Cap. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
Romeo. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Juliet. What must be shall be.
I do remember well where I should be,
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
Apoth. Who calls so loud?
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Lady Cap. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
Romeo. I take thee at thy word.
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
Friar L. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
Lady Cap. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Juliet. O comfortable Friar! where is my lord?
Paris. Monday, my lord.
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
Bal. No, my good lord.
Juliet. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
Romeo. I would I were thy bird.
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
1 Watchman. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
2. Watchman. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
Romeo. [ coming forward.]
Have at thee, coward!
CAPULET'S orchard.
Verona. CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S orchard.
Romeo. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
And stole into the covert of the wood.
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
Juliet. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Friar L. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
Cap. A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God.
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
Then music with her silver sound'-
'Then music with her silver sound
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Romeo. What hast thou found?
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
And soar with them above a common bound.
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
And from her womb children of divers kind
[They retire behind].
We sucking on her natural bosom find;
The which if you with patient ears attend,
Tomorrow will I send.
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
Friar L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
Mont. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
Mont. Both by myself and many other friend;
Lady Cap. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Juliet. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
Romeo. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
This but begins the woe others must end.
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand
Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
Nurse. [Within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
Can I demand.
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
Friar L. Hold thy desperate hand.
What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
That ever ever I did yet behold!
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
That God had lent us but this only child;
Lady Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
'A was a merry man) took up the child.
Lady Cap. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
Your lady's love against some other maid
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
And all the better is it for the maid.
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
moved.
Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.
Enter BALTHASAR, Romeo's man, booted.
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
Juliet. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
dared.
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
And with my child my joys are buried.
How stands your disposition to be married?
Juliet. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
Romeo. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Juliet. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
It is supposed the fair creature died-
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
Friar L. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-
But Romeo may not- he is banished.
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
They are free men, but I am banished.
Doting like me, and like me banished,
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Juliet. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
And usest none in that true use indeed
You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
Shall be the label to another deed,
1 Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
To have her match'd; and having now provided
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
He made you for a highway to my bed;
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
More torches here! - Come on then, let's to bed.
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Juliet. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
narrow to an ell broad!
Lady Cap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
Ser. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
But not another sin upon my head
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
Young son, it argues a distempered head
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
Lady Cap. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
Friar L. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-
Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
To make confession and to be absolv'd.
Romeo. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
Cap. He shall be endur'd.
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
As violently as hasty powder fir'd
Romeo. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
In my behalf- my reputation stain'd
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
Warm and new kill'd.
Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
-Good faith! 'Tis day! [Play music.]
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
Romeo opens the tomb.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
[Lays him in the tomb.]
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
SCENE - Verona once in the fifth act, at Mantua.
And light thee on the way to Mantua.
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
But I will write again to Mantua,
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
And then in post he came from Mantua
AN APOTHECARY, of Mantua.
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
ESCALUS, Prince of Verona.
Lucio and the lively Helena.'
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Cap. Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha.
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
Romeo. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a
Enter APOTHECARY.
ACT IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
ACT I  -  ACT II  -  ACT III  -  ACT IV  -  ACT V
ACT V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].
Enter TYBALT.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter old CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET.
[to SECOND CAPULET]
[Exit JULIET.]
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
[Enter JULIET.]
Romeo. [to JULIET].
CHORUS
Enter CHORUS.
Enter CHORUS.
Enter MONTAGUE [and SERVANTS].
Enter the PRINCE [and ATTENDANTS].
MASQUERS, TORCHBEARES, GUARDS, WATCHMEN, and ATTENDANTS
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the CAPULETS.
Enter CITIZENS.
THREE MUSICIANS.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS.
[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET and PARIS.
Enter ABRAM and BALTHASAR, two SERVINGMEN of the MONTAGUES.
with five or six other MASQUERS and TORCHBEARES.
Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]
Enter PETER.
Enter NURSE [and PETER].
PAGE to Paris; another PAGE, an OFFICER.
[Exit BALTHASAR].
Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.
Romeo. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.
[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter BENVOLIO.
[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO.]
[Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE and BENVOLIO].
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO,
[Exit ROMEO.]
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and ROMEO.
Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO.
Enter CAPULET, COUNTY PARIS, and SERVANT - the ClOWN.
Enter Prince ESCALUS with his TRAIN.
Enter FRIAR JOHN.
[Exeunt CAPULET and SERVINGMEN.]
Lady Cap. We follow thee. [Exit a SERVINGMAN].
Enter a SERVINGMAN.
Romeo. [to a SERVINGMAN] 
Enter PRINCE, MONTAGUE, CAPULET,  their WIVES and ALL.
SCENE VI.
ACT III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
ACT II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
Juliet. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I
Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,
Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
A visor for a visor! What care I
How long is't now since last yourself and I
And hither shall he come; and he and I
Juliet. Sweet, so would I.
Mer. And so did I.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
Juliet. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
PROLOGUE
THE PROLOGUE
[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE].
Enter old MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE.
[Exit NURSE.]
Enter NURSE.
Enter NURSE.
Exeunt [LADY CAPULETMother and NURSE.]
Enter CAPULET and NURSE.
[Exeunt LADY CAPULET and NURSE.]
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].
[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]
Enter JULIET and NURSE.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, JULIET, TYBALT, NURSE
[Exit PAGE]
[Exit PAGE.]
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE].
[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE].
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.
DRAMATIS PERSONAE
THE END