It strains me past the compass of my wits.
Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,

Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.

By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
Shall I send to thee?
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,

If I profane with my unworthiest hand
SCENE IV.
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
ACT I  -  ACT II  -  ACT III  -  ACT IV  -  ACT V

Samp. [aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?

LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;

Romeo. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Romeo. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits

I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
Juliet. What villain, madam?
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]

Romeo. If my heart's dear love-
Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell

Thou talk'st of nothing.
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.

At home, abroad, alone, in company,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
Staying for thine to keep him company.
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,

To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
Mont. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,

What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
Enter CHORUS.
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Enter CHORUS.

Juliet. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Romeo. For your broken shin.
Romeo. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Lady Cap. What noise is here?

Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
Juliet. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.

As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,

How shall that faith return again to earth
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.

This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
ACT II.
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
SCENE II.

How doth my lady? Is my father well?
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
That lets it hop a little from her hand,

Romeo. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?

That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
Because he married me before to Romeo?

I was your mother much upon these years
And then will I be general of your woes
To stop the inundation of her tears,
Romeo. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!

My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
What further woe conspires against mine age?
Bal. No, my good lord.
Paris. Happily met, my lady and my wife!

I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.

Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Romeo. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will

follow straight.
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.

Nurse. Peter!
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

As that is desperate which we would prevent.
And see how one another lends content;
Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.

narrow to an ell broad!
Lady Cap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
This but begins the woe others must end.
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.

For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
But I will write again to Mantua,
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!

'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
Romeo. I dreamt a dream to-night.
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath

'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal

1 Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
To have her match'd; and having now provided
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,

God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
[Enter NURSE with cords, wringing her hands.]
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
And the place death, considering who thou art,

Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage

We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,
But to himself so secret and so close,
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.

And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.

Romeo. Go to! I say you shall.
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,

For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
Juliet. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Staying for thine to keep him company.
In what vile part of this anatomy

Juliet. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!

Juliet. A thousand times good night! [Exit JULIET above].
[Enter JULIET above.]
Friar L. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,

Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.

Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
She could have run and waddled all about;
a letter?
To see now how a jest shall come about!

JULIET rises.
[PARIS retires.]
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,

Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.

Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
- Sirrah, fetch drier logs!

I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
Juliet. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell

And all the better is it for the maid.
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
I will omit no opportunity

Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Lady Cap. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was

Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
Enter TYBALT.
Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Enter TYBALT.

A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,

Ben. The what?
And that we have a curse in having her.
Juliet. The tears have got small victory by that,
Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.

That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!

Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.

Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,

Within thy help and holy physic lies.
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE alone, with a basket.

But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!

Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Lady Cap. Ho, daughter! are you up?
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!

And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
Lady Cap. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
O son, the night before thy wedding day

An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
dared.
Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take

Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
More fierce and more inexorable far
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,

1 Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
To have her match'd; and having now provided
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
Lady Cap. Ho, daughter! are you up?

Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
for the goose.

Give me a case to put my visage in.
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
Were in a mask?

Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE.
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.

Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
To an impatient child that hath new robes
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,

If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
Hie you to church; I must another way,
Mer. He is wise,
Do thou but call my resolution wise

Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
Ser. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?

[Enter JULIET above again].
Romeo. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
And yet I would it were to give again.
For fair without the fair within to hide.

Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
Romeo. Whose house?
Her mother is the lady of the house.

How stands your disposition to be married?
Juliet. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Romeo. My dear?
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,

[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple

Cap. All things that we ordained festival
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Turn from their office to black funeral-
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.

Thursday let it be, a Thursday, tell her
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
Romeo. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!

Cap. Will you tell me that?
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Nurse. What?
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.

Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Your tributary drops belong to woe,

Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.

wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,

Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
On Thursday next be married to this County.

Romeo. No matter. Get thee gone
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Juliet. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.

Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.
Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]

The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Enter SAMSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers.
Romeo. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
But, let them measure us by what they will,

Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt

Ben. Of love?
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
And reason coldly of your grievances,
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.

He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
master's kinsmen.
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]

Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Mont. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!

And with this knife I'll help it presently.
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.

Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
For who is living, if those two are gone?

[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
As I intended, for it wrought on her

This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Ser. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
With instruments upon them fit to open

Friar L. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
wall.

That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

Samp. Fear me not.
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
MERCUTIO, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.

Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Ser. To supper, to our house.
Romeo. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Romeo. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness

For exile hath more terror in his look,
First Ser. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.

Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [He Kisses her.]
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
And in the taste confounds the appetite.

Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Peter. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say  for you. It
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!

Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
Juliet. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,

