Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
for, in the great chamber.
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.

any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a
Romeo. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve

Is empty on the back of Montague,
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,

Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
As I remember, this should be the house.
Suspecting that we both were in a house

Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.

Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
Juliet. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
We took this mattock and this spade from him

Are made already mothers. By my count,
And let mischance be slave to patience.
[They march about the stage and exeunt.]
And bear this work of heaven with patience;

This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.

Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Peter. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say  for you. It

Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.

Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.

For he hath still been tried a holy man.
Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,

Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
By playing it to me with so sour a face.

In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Enter PETER.

Lies my consent and fair according voice.
An she agree, within her scope of choice
And do not interrupt me in my course.
But he that hath the steerage of my course

Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Would through the airy region stream so bright
Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!

This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
Lady Cap. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;

Here in my house do him disparagement.
She could have run and waddled all about;
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
To see now how a jest shall come about!

Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
Paris. Come you to make confession to this father?
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
This letter he early bid me give his father,

Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss. [Exit.]
She's not well married that lives married long,
For well you know this is a pitiful case. [Exit.]
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving

Good night.
Lady Cap. Good night.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
moved.

Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
Unto my cell.
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.

Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
[They fight.]

Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Romeo. As if that name,
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.

I'll not endure him.
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed

Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are
Friar L. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay

Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [He Kisses her.]
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.

What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!

Romeo. 'Tis the way
Mont. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I

For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
Examine other beauties.
moved.

When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-

Juliet. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';

She will beshrew me much that Romeo
I wake before the time that Romeo
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!

You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
Cap. How canst thou try them so?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.

Farewell.
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
I was your mother much upon these years
To stop the inundation of her tears,

for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.

Romeo. I take thee at thy word.
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!

I drew to part them. In the instant came
And his to me,
Juliet. Ay me!
Prodigious birth of love it is to me

Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
We cannot without circumstance descry.
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary

O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;

Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;

I come from Lady Juliet.
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine

My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a

Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?
By any other name would smell as sweet.

[They march about the stage and exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;

In such a gorgeous palace!
You tallow-face!
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!

Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
Friar L. Go with me to the vault.

Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge

Nurse. Romeo can,
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,

CITIZENS of Verona; KINSFOLK of both houses;
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,

Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read. [He reads the paper.]
this that was so full of his ropery?
[Giving back the paper.]
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,

Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Ben. Stop there, stop there!
Romeo. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Friar L. How long hath he been there?

And then my husband (God be with his soul!
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.

[Exeunt.]
With instruments upon them fit to open
[Exeunt.]
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,

Romeo. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins

SCENE I.
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
SCENE I.
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.

How doth my lady? Is my father well?
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps

Nurse. There's no trust,
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Romeo. By a name
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,

Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Lady Cap. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Think true love acted simple modesty.

'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Juliet. What must be shall be.

Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;

The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.

Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.

Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
Apoth. Who calls so loud?
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,

But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
when 'twas a little prating thing - O, there is a nobleman in
That ever ever I did yet behold!
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in

A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,

By having him making yourself no less.
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
And she as much in love, her means much less
Is too much for a score

Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.

Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
But come, young waverer, come go with me.

But sadly tell me who.
To Lammastide?
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,

Romeo. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-

Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body

Among fresh female buds shall you this night
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,

And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
[He walks by them and sings.]
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!

By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Suspecting that we both were in a house
CAPULET'S house.

[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?

Friar L. Not in a grave
Fetch me my rapier, boy. [Exit boy.] What, dares the slave
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Ben. Of love?

Nurse. O lamentable day!
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Nurse. O lamentable day!
This doth not so, for she divideth us.

If I did stay to look on his intents.
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.

And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Help, help! Call help.
Juliet. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,

That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.

Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
the two.

To see thy son and heir more early down.
Romeo. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
Or, if I live, is it not very like

When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of

Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
NURSE to Juliet.
Juliet. I will confess to you that I love him.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.

Romeo. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare

Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Ben. But new struck nine.
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,

When well apparell'd April on the heel
Romeo. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!

Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
And here he writes that he did buy a poison

Paris. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Juliet. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,

ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
To see now how a jest shall come about!
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Beshrew your heart for sending me about

Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
And he shall signify from time to time
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
Lady Cap. O woful time!

Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
Because it is an enemy to thee.
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.
O, what more favour can I do to thee

Juliet. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
Came he not home to-night?
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Romeo. What hast thou found?

Juliet. How now? Who calls?
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.

Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Away to heaven respective lenity,
Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!

Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!

That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
So early walking did I see your son.
Peter. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron

Friar J. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.

Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Enter PETER.
Enter NURSE [and PETER].

The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
Have they been merry! which their keepers call

But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
'An if a man did need a poison now
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Juliet. A rhyme I learnt even now

Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Shalt with him hence.
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Immediately we do exile him hence.

Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?

fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,

here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;

Romeo. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
A street.
Mantua. A street.

In such a gorgeous palace!
You tallow-face!
Romeo. So thrive my soul-
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!

Verona. CAPULET'S orchard.
Juliet. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
CAPULET'S orchard.
Came he not home to-night?

Friar L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
Friar L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!

'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
Or manage it to part these men with me.

From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
Juliet. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!

'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day

O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air

cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
a hole.

O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;

Abate thy valour in the acting it.
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
Enter PRINCE, MONTAGUE, CAPULET,  their WIVES and ALL.
SCENE VI.

We cannot without circumstance descry.
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies

Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
By any other name would smell as sweet.
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat

Juliet. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
1 Ser. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
Would through the airy region stream so bright
Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!

1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,

Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
[Lays down a knife.]
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?

Romeo. When the devout religion of mine eye
Romeo. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.

'A was a merry man) took up the child.
Lady Cap. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
For you and I are past our dancing days.
Lady Cap. A fortnight and odd days.

Mer. And so did I.
ACT I.
[They fight.]
[They fight.]

But Romeo may not. More validity,
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,

Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
Romeo. Is the day so young?
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.

Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand

On the forefinger of an alderman,
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they

What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Lady Cap. That same villain Romeo.

I would have been abed an hour ago.
Lady Cap. O woful time!
But 'tis no wit to go.
But when I came, some minute ere the time

Nurse. I know not.
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,

The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
Mont. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Your tributary drops belong to woe,

O cousin, cousin!
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Prince. This letter doth make good the Friar's words,

With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?

Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Paris. I do defy thy, conjuration

They are but beggars that can count their worth;
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
Nurse. What?
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.

He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
Romeo. Nay, good goose, bite not!
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,

Enter JULIET somewhat fast and embraces Romeo.
Romeo. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love

Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Romeo. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?

My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd

O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Lady Cap. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
And drink it off, and if you had the strength

[She kneels down.]
[She kneels down.]
The County Paris hath set up his rest
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!

A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
How oft when men are at the point of death
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Romeo. Is she a Capulet?

'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.

My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
Her mother is the lady of the house.
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
As I remember, this should be the house.

'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,

This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,

SCENE III.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
ACT II.
Lady Cap. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.

Is partly to behold my lady's face,
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!

Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.

Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,

Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends
Juliet. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize

O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.

Unless that husband send it me from heaven
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.

Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
[Enter JULIET above again].
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
He that is strucken blind cannot forget

fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
At some hours in the night spirits resort-
Juliet. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!

That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
Despised substance of divinest show!
I promise you, but for your company,
Compare her face with some that I shall show,

Juliet. Sweet, so would I.
Mer. And so did I.
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,

found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of
Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.
Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;

Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm

Romeo. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,

Piteous predicament!
Many for many virtues excellent,
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats

And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
If I did stay to look on his intents.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.

[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET and PARIS.
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,

Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
And then will I be general of your woes
Juliet. Romeo!
Romeo. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!

And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
read anything you see?
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.

This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
Peter. Anon.
Which craves as desperate an execution

that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.

Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
Or manage it to part these men with me.
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.

To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
On Thursday next be married to this County.
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.

Enter BALTHASAR, Romeo's man, booted.
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
Now  fellow, what is there?

Mer. By my heel, I care not.
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;

wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
Pet. You will not then?
And since that time it is eleven years,
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;

On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.

Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
[They march about the stage and exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]

For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
Friar L. Go with me to the vault.
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,

Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Lady Cap. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.

Hath had no notice of these accidents;
How oft when men are at the point of death
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Why I descend into this bed of death

Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.

Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,

But, let them measure us by what they will,
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest

1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
Juliet. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
ere it be out.

Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,

Yet most suspected, as the time and place
O that she knew she were!
Verona. A public place.
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were

Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
I was your mother much upon these years
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
To stop the inundation of her tears,

I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.

And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
And the place death, considering who thou art,
Mont. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Which the commission of thy years and art

Juliet. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
That I yet know not?
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Nurse. I know not.

I think you are happy in this second match,
Romeo. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;

Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,

Which is the god of my idolatry,
Ser. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors

And this shall free thee from this present shame,
And here is come to do some villanous shame
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.

Juliet. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Juliet. No, no. But all this did I know before.
Will I set up my everlasting rest

Juliet. A rhyme I learnt even now
But I will watch you from such watching now.
Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
For I have need of many orisons
Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.

Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
I drew to part them. In the instant came
Juliet. Ay me!

Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,

The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Romeo opens the tomb.
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him

And all the better is it for the maid.
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
No better term than this: thou art a villain.

What mean these masterless and gory swords
Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
CITIZENS of Verona; KINSFOLK of both houses;
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;

Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
A greater power than we can contradict
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!

Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
Ben. But new struck nine.
Come, go with me. [To the SERVANT, giving back a paper]

They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

[Knock.]
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up; [Knock.]
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
Now  fellow, what is there?

They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
I was your mother much upon these years

Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,

Together with the terror of the place-
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
But the true ground of all these piteous woes

How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.

Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Juliet. Do not swear at all;

Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-

Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.

Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Or, if I live, is it not very like
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,

We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
the two.
But now I see this one is one too much,
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,

So fearful were they of infection.
That were some spite; my invocation
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!

Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Being one too many by my weary self-
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,

Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
I'll to my rest.
am a pretty piece of flesh.

Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;
SCENE VI.
ACT III.

Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,

dared.
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.

SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.

Romeo is coming.
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
Stay not to question, for the Watch is coming.
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.

Of disobedient opposition
So fearful were they of infection.
Mer. And so did I.
ACT I.

CAPULET'S house.
A room in CAPULET'S house.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,

If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.

Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.

Juliet. You kiss by th' book.
1. Mus. No.
Friar L. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
I would not for the wealth of all this town

Enter ROMEO.
But, soft! what day is this?
Enter ROMEO.
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?

Nurse. Anon, anon!
Peter. Anon.
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
He swung about his head and cut the winds,

A street.
A Street.
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
This is she-

The County will be here with music straight,
Mer. Right.
Enter PETER.
Enter NURSE [and PETER].

And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?

case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Enter CAPULET, COUNTY PARIS, and SERVANT - the ClOWN.
Enter Prince ESCALUS with his TRAIN.

Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
occasion.

And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
And soar with them above a common bound.

Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in.
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
when 'twas a little prating thing - O, there is a nobleman in
FRIAR LAURENCE'S  cell.

Verona. A public place.
A public place.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Friar L. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift

villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Making them women of good carriage.
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!

[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO.]
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'

wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,

Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
Lady Cap. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.

my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
This is she-
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Nurse. Even so lies she,

Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
Dost thou not laugh?

Cap. How canst thou try them so?
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
ACT III.
SCENE III.

And then I ran away to call the Watch.
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.
Her mother is the lady of the house.
As I remember, this should be the house.

Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Ser. To supper, to our house.
Juliet. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!

Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats

Lady Cap. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Lady Cap. Good night.
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.

We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
wisely.
Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-

Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Friar L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of

To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint

For this alliance may so happy prove
LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
Black and portentous must this humour prove
Is empty on the back of Montague,

That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;

Mer. Why, may one ask?
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law

Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
So stumblest on my counsel?
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.

Was ever book containing such vile matter
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
Lady Cap. What is the matter?
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!

Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?

As that is desperate which we would prevent.
Peter. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron
And see how one another lends content;
Romeo. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.

Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?

And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
Exit TYBALT [with his followers].
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;

Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,

Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Juliet. I would not for the world they saw thee here.

Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Think true love acted simple modesty.
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
[He leaps the orchad-wall.]

We are undone, lady, we are undone!
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Without a sudden calm will overset

More fierce and more inexorable far
[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]

Greg. The heads of the maids?
Juliet. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.

Enter BALTHASAR, Romeo's man, booted.
CAPULET'S house.
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
CAPULET'S house.

I'll not endure him.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
Juliet. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,

My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
Either be gone before the watch be set,

Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun

I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!

Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
On the forefinger of an alderman,
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.

Friar L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
[She kneels down.]

Now  fellow, what is there?
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?

Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
That monthly changes in her circled orb,

for the goose.
[Exit NURSE.]
goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Enter NURSE.

Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
As living here and you no use of him.

God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
Friar L. Hold thy desperate hand.
What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand

With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,

Juliet. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
Is very good meat in Lent;

Environed with all these hideous fears,
Juliet. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Or never after look me in the face.

But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
Friar L. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the

Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
[They fight. TYBALT falls.]
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Juliet. How now? Who calls?

All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Juliet. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
Juliet. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words

Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?

Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,

Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]
FRIAR JOHN, of the same order.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. Exit.

Because he married me before to Romeo?
Shame come to Romeo!
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy

Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
Bal. No, my good lord.

There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.

Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy

Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.

Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?

Lady Cap. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
For men so old as we to keep the peace.

1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
Never was seen so black a day as this.

You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
Madam, if you could find out but a man
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;

Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,

CAPULET'S house.
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
CAPULET'S house.
And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!

O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,

Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
As that is desperate which we would prevent.

Romeo. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
And where the worser is predominant,
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.

Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,

But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

Romeo. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.

[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
Friar J. Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho!
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!

Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.

I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?

Dost thou not laugh?
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]

And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet

Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
Juliet. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
Lady Cap. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
More honourable state, more courtship lives

[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
Enter NURSE [and PETER].
PAGE to Paris; another PAGE, an OFFICER.

All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
Here in this city visiting the sick,
The life of Tybalt.
[Exit.]

O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
Romeo. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit 1 Servingman.]
[Exit  Servingman.]

Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,

I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight

The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Enter SAMSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers.
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.

Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
That God had lent us but this only child;
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
Lady Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!

Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Juliet. What storm is this that blows so contrary?

Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Lady Cap. Why, how now, Juliet?

Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.

That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Enter ROMEO.
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and ROMEO.

Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
My will to her consent is but a part.
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,

into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
Turn from their office to black funeral-
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
Come, vial.

Mer. I am hurt.
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
Montagues.
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!

And he shall signify from time to time
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Lady Cap. O woful time!
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.

Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
What if it be a poison which the friar
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.

Romeo. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
Romeo. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the

Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
And I am proof against their enmity.
And thou art wedded to calamity.

But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
Juliet. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,

But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Lady Cap. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;

Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
Friar L. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;

Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
Romeo. Nay, that's not so.

I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.

Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
Romeo and Juliet
[Exit.]
The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]

Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
Friar L. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-

I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?

Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.

Friar L. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)

Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends
And then I ran away to call the Watch.
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.

2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
- Sirrah, fetch drier logs!
their heads.
then enter three or four CITIZENS with clubs.

Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.

If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.

[Exit.]
Tomorrow will I send.
The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;

And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.

Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,

Cap. How canst thou try them so?
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
His fault concludes but what the law should end,

Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Romeo. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.

If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.
Romeo. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!

To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
Romeo. If my heart's dear love-
a hole.

Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
[She kneels down.]
[She kneels down.]

Romeo. By the hour of nine.
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce

My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.

Friar L. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
I come from Lady Juliet.

Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
Good night.
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
Lady Cap. Good night.

But to rejoice in splendour of my own.
Ser. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?

'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
Is but a little way above our heads,
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.

Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
She was too good for me. But, as I said,

In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
Cap. Go, begone. [Exit Servingman.]
And I am proof against their enmity.

Nurse. Even so lies she,
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!

Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
A street.
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
A Street.

Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
Came he not home to-night?
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.

Two households, both alike in dignity,
Away to heaven respective lenity,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

Romeo. Whose house?
Her mother is the lady of the house.
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;

Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,

Your tributary drops belong to woe,
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,

Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
But the true ground of all these piteous woes

What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
Verona. FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.

A gentleman of princely parentage,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!

Nurse. O lamentable day!
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
Juliet. Romeo!
Romeo?

Lady Cap. What noise is here?
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
Friar L. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Friar L. Who is it?

The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
I- measuring his affections by my own,
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.

Romeo. So thrive my soul-
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
To press before thy father to a grave?

it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Paris. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.

Juliet. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.

No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
Juliet. Can heaven be so envious?

Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
It rains downright.
What further woe conspires against mine age?
Would through the airy region stream so bright

Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,

Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.

And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
Is but a little way above our heads,
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.

Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this

With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
Take all myself.

Abram. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Samp. Well, sir.
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
O anything, of nothing first create!

Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,

[They fight. TYBALT falls.]
Juliet. How now? Who calls?
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;

God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Juliet. Feeling so the loss,

The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are

You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,

[singing] lady, lady, lady.
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
But Romeo may not- he is banished.

As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come! [Knock.]
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.

What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
By any other name would smell as sweet.
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.

My life were better ended by their hate
Juliet. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,

Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
Examine other beauties.

Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
Your lady's love against some other maid

Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.

One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,

Juliet. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;

Romeo. There is no world without Verona walls,
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [He falls.]
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.

SCENE II.
SCENE II.
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,

My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'

narrow to an ell broad!
Lady Cap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.

Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,

Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Juliet. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
And her immortal part with angels lives.
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.

Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
Is he gone and hath nothing?
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown

Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?

Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
Friar L. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?

Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].
Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Enter TYBALT.

Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
Romeo. As if that name,
And vice sometime's by action dignified.

[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.

Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.

Romeo. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Or, if I live, is it not very like
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

[Exeunt.]
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
Romeo. What is her mother?
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other

Two households, both alike in dignity,
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
Away to heaven respective lenity,
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.

Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Ben. Soft! I will go along.
And with my child my joys are buried.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,

We cannot without circumstance descry.
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,

[Snatching ROMEO'S dagger.]
it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
As is a winged messenger of heaven

Lady Cap. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Through fair Verona; find those persons out

And pay no worship to the garish sun.
Juliet. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.

Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
As is the night before some festival
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight

much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
And drink it off, and if you had the strength

Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,

I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!

And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.

Being in night, all this is but a dream,
'Tis now near night.
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;

I would have been abed an hour ago.
But 'tis no wit to go.
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
Romeo. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee

Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!

I have been feasting with mine enemy,
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
Second Ser. Ay, boy, ready.
That we may call it early by-and-by.

Friar L. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
Making them women of good carriage.
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!

Think true love acted simple modesty.
His son is thirty.
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?

O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;

and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
read anything you see?
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.

for, in the great chamber.
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
And makes himself an artificial night.
That all the world will be in love with night

case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.

Is death to any he that utters them.
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
Romeo. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.

Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim

Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
Paris. I do defy thy, conjuration
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may

Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.
In all her best array bear her to church;
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;

Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies

Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.

What say you, Simon Catling?
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
tutor me from quarrelling!
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-

What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?

By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
To be consorted with the humorous night.

Romeo. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
But, let them measure us by what they will,
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!

And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'

Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Juliet. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;

Romeo. A most courteous exposition.
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
Of disobedient opposition
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.

Romeo. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
A precious ring- a ring that I must use
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,

As is a winged messenger of heaven
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
a hole.
Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.

Nurse. What's this? what's this?
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
Romeo. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
to hear it.

He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,

If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Make haste, I say.

Which then most sought where most might not be found,
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim

Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.

A visor for a visor! What care I
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
How long is't now since last yourself and I
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long

That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!

Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
I conjure only but to raise up him.
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
[Enter NURSE with cords, wringing her hands.]

The boy gives warning something doth approach.
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,

Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
But to himself so secret and so close,
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.

Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
[He leaps the orchad-wall.]
Romeo. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.

Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.

But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
Friar L. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
To merit bliss by making me despair.
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,

This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there

Cap. Go to, go to!
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
Romeo. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have
To lay one in, another out to have.

Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.
The hateful mansion.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine

Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,

With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
Romeo. Go to! I say you shall.
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,

Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
If be be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
Ben. Groan? Why, no;

[Knock.]
As Phaeton would whip you to the West
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up; [Knock.]
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.

Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
'Tis now near night.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;

And I am proof against their enmity.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
And thou art wedded to calamity.
Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.

In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue

Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
If ever you disturb our streets again,
And then down falls again.

So please you, let me now be left alone,
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!

Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
Turn from their office to black funeral-
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks. [Retiring.]
Come, vial.

Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
To County Paris, to prepare him up

To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
Friar L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?

Lady Cap. O woful time!
Digressing from the valour of a man;
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.

Call, good Mercutio.
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,

Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET and PARIS.

Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Juliet. Blister'd be thy tongue
At my poor house look to behold this night

Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake

And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the

Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.

Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!

They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Anthony, and Potpan!
Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
On the forefinger of an alderman,

Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.

for the goose.
Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
Romeo. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.

Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Paris. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
Friar L. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.

Juliet. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
Romeo. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.

That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
We would as willingly give cure as know.
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know

By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,

Enter BENVOLIO.
[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.

I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,

Enter NURSE.
Exeunt [LADY CAPULETMother and NURSE.]
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.

And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.

Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
Romeo. A most courteous exposition.
Of disobedient opposition

Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Good night.

Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.

Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
ACT IV.
SCENE IV.

Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
Paris. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
ABRAM, servant to Montague.

For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
At my poor house look to behold this night
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.

case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?

Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
This doth not so, for she divideth us.

A lover may bestride the gossamer
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
For it was bad enough before their spite.
A villain, that is hither come in spite

Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
1. Mus. What will you give us?

As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
O son, the night before thy wedding day
But not another sin upon my head
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.

And then down falls again.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Friar J. I could not send it- here it is again-
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.

But he that hath the steerage of my course
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;

If I did stay to look on his intents.
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,

Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].
[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]

Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
Of yonder knight?

Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy

ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
At the prefixed hour of her waking
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits

Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Mont. Both by myself and many other friend;
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Lady Cap. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend

Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare

Juliet. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,

And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
'An if a man did need a poison now
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.

On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?

O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
And her immortal part with angels lives.

Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
Were in a mask?
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.

For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
with five or six other MASQUERS and TORCHBEARES.
Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].

Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
More torches here! - Come on then, let's to bed.
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.

Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,

[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
Here's to my love! [He drinks.] O true apothecary!
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!

A street.
A Street.
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.

Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
So far from sounding and discovery,

And see how be will take it at your hands.
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,

A street.
Mantua. A street.
But my true love is grown to such excess
Being held a foe, he may not have access

And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!

Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.
Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds

Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Verona. A public place.

Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'

Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.

Mer. He is wise,
Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Do thou but call my resolution wise
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;

Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Peter. Anon.
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Which craves as desperate an execution

Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
Sev. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
SCENE I.
SCENE I.

Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Romeo. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Romeo. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
Romeo. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,

Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
That God had lent us but this only child;
Lady Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!

Ben. Groan? Why, no;
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
O that I were a glove upon that hand,

Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
And young affection gapes to be his heir;

That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
Romeo. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,

Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.

What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
Of yonder knight?

Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
Then music with her silver sound'-
Sev. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
And with this knife I'll help it presently.

But when I came, some minute ere the time
When presently through all thy veins shall run
here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,

Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
And her immortal part with angels lives.

[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?

Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Friar L. Who is it?
Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
Cap. Young Romeo is it?

See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Romeo. Good morrow, father.
There shall no figure at such rate be set
TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.

Juliet. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,

Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
I do beseech thee-

O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
That God had lent us but this only child;
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.

Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,

Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet

Have they been merry! which their keepers call
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand

Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
To Lammastide?
a hole.
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,

Romeo. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].

To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle

Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
Stay but a little, I will come again. [Exit JULIET above.]
man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,

Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
How shall that faith return again to earth

Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
That calls our person from our morning rest?
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest

Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Lady Cap. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word

As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
Bal. No, my good lord.

Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,

Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
They are free men, but I am banished.
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
Doting like me, and like me banished,

He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.

Ser. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:

Romeo. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Romeo. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.

That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
O that she knew she were!
[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO.]

O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
1 Ser. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.

Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Or shall we on without apology?
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey

Ben. For what, I pray thee?
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
And all those twenty could but kill one life.

These dead men's tombs.
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
Juliet. O comfortable Friar! where is my lord?

Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.

Then music with her silver sound'-
'Then music with her silver sound
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?

Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:

Friar J. Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho!
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
This is she-
Nurse. Even so lies she,

I would have been abed an hour ago.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
But 'tis no wit to go.
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.

Enter NURSE [and PETER].
PAGE to Paris; another PAGE, an OFFICER.
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Bal. Full half an hour.

That I might touch that cheek!
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Enter ROMEO, and BALTHASAR with a torch, a mattock
By doing damned hate upon thyself?

For though fond nature bids us all lament,
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
Examine every married lineament,
Take it in what sense thou wilt.

Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.

I'll to my rest.
Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
The County Paris hath set up his rest
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.

Juliet. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
Anthony, and Potpan!

Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Friar L. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.

Nurse. I speak no treason.
Away from light steals home my heavy son
And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-
I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout

Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
To be consorted with the humorous night.

Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Paris. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!

And I will do it without fear or doubt,
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
Juliet. What villain, madam?
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!

As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
FRIAR JOHN, of the same order.
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Juliet. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.

Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Juliet. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Juliet. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.

Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
For in a minute there are many days.

Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
Friar L. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Mont. But I can give thee more;

Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.

Juliet. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
Romeo. And bad'st me bury love.
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
Juliet. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?

Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
Romeo. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,

And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Lady Cap. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
Friar L. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,

Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,
[FRIAR stoops and looks on the blood and weapons.]
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins

Second Ser. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands,
And see how be will take it at your hands.
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name

Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO,
Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].
[Exit ROMEO.]
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]

Romeo. Whose house?
Her mother is the lady of the house.
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
Too great oppression for a tender thing.

Friar L. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,

Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?

O, he's a lovely gentleman!
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest

Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
Juliet. What villain, madam?

And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Even now the frozen bosom of the North

Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Romeo. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
To Lammastide?
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,

They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
Lady Cap. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you

Lady Cap. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,

Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law

Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
AN APOTHECARY, of Mantua.
With all the admired beauties of Verona.

I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE].
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE.

Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
Paris. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
ABRAM, servant to Montague.

and a crow of iron.
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death

Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee-
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.

Ser. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.

And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;

She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
I wake before the time that Romeo
He swung about his head and cut the winds,

Juliet. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
Friar L. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Romeo. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.

An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
Lies my consent and fair according voice.

First Ser. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
Juliet. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay

SCENE II.
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
SCENE II.
For who is living, if those two are gone?

That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Friar L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;

'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'

Ben. In love?
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!

She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
I will omit no opportunity
How shall that faith return again to earth
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?

Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Romeo. If my heart's dear love-

Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Why should you fall into so deep an O?  [He rises]
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
To beautify him only lacks a cover.

Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Friar L. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.

An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;

And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
me?
To sunder his that was thine enemy?

But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
Because he married me before to Romeo?
All our whole city is much bound to him.
And by and by my master drew on him,

SCENE V.
SCENE V.
Or, if I live, is it not very like
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,

It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
for sounding.
That he should hither come as this dire night
Out on her, hilding!

Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
But now I see this one is one too much,
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,

It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.

thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
Is death to any he that utters them.
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.

Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
Nurse. Peter!

My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French

Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.

The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
Romeo opens the tomb.
Cousin Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
O, by this count I shall be much in years

Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
[Exit JULIET.]
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
Enter JULIET.

Juliet. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh

Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine

very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his

And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.

Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
Romeo. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
Now  fellow, what is there?

County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.

Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night

Mer. Right.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
And presently took post to tell it you.
Samp. If you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.

Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Romeo. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?

That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
Romeo. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Friar L. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;

The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
Do you not see that I am out of breath?

Romeo. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
Pet. You will not then?

How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
fairly last night.
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Without a sudden calm will overset

And since that time it is eleven years,
And then down falls again.
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
Friar J. I could not send it- here it is again-

To stop the inundation of her tears,
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!

Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a

O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
And I, for winking at you, discords too,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,

This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
Never was seen so black a day as this.
Examine every married lineament,
Piteous predicament!

Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
And I am proof against their enmity.

Juliet. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
'Tis now near night.
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;

Nurse. There's no trust,
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
With open outcry, toward our monument.

All our whole city is much bound to him.
Romeo. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
And by and by my master drew on him,
For fair without the fair within to hide.

Romeo. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
Samp. Fear me not.

Do thou but call my resolution wise
But love thee better than thou canst devise
[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE].
Enter old MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE.

Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Greg. [aside to SAMSON] No.
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
Romeo. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.

An old hare hoar,
Romeo. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
These dead men's tombs.
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.

With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
and all the GUESTS and GENTLEWOMEN to the Masquers.
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.

Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Romeo. Farewell!
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;

But my true love is grown to such excess
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Being held a foe, he may not have access
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.

And in this state she 'gallops night by night
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
So fearful were they of infection.
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.

But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
She shall be married to this noble earl.
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay

That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;

And soundly too. Your houses!
CITIZENS of Verona; KINSFOLK of both houses;
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,

Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
And he shall signify from time to time
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Lady Cap. O woful time!

But now I see this one is one too much,
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Mer. I am hurt.
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt

By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been

Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand

They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Juliet. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!

It burneth in the Capels' monument.
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.

Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
Within thy help and holy physic lies.

Within this hour my man shall be with thee
I do beseech thee-
Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take

That I will show you shining at this feast,
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
Mer. Right.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift

That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
MASQUERS, TORCHBEARES, GUARDS, WATCHMEN, and ATTENDANTS
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the CAPULETS.

From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.

For this time all the rest depart away.
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Juliet. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.

In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.

But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Juliet. Feeling so the loss,

Juliet. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
Friar L. That's a certain text.
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next

(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
Montagues.
Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?

As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
Is too much for a score

Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.

Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.

Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
[PAGE whistes.]

She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Romeo. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.

What if this mixture do not work at all?
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.

The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
And so good Capulet, which name I tender

And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
Enter JULIET and NURSE.
All this I know; and to the marriage
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, JULIET, TYBALT, NURSE

Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.

And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Romeo. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
And fearfully did menace me with death
Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.

By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'

Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce

Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
For I have need of many orisons
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.

An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
To be consorted with the humorous night.

Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
One that you love.
-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;

Ben. Groan? Why, no;
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
[Exit.]
With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]

for sounding.
Out on her, hilding!
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you

Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.

Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?

Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
Romeo. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,

Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being
for sounding.
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-

Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
Romeo. Pink for flower.
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.

with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
But to the earth some special good doth give;
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?

[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.

Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.

Bal. I dare not, sir.
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!

That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
But to himself so secret and so close,

My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Juliet. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Friar L. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.

Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!

wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
Pet. You will not then?
Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft

Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.

Romeo. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
[Exeunt.]
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
[Exeunt.]

I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET'S chamber.

Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.

But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!

Juliet. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread

Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.

We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Mont. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Ben. Why dost thou stay?

Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
Bal. Full half an hour.
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,

Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Romeo. Is the day so young?
'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young

Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
Was ever book containing such vile matter
FRIAR JOHN, of the same order.
Lady Cap. What is the matter?

Romeo. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.

In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,

O, what more favour can I do to thee
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;

I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,

Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
Friar L. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,

Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.

In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
SAMSON, servant to Capulet.
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
JULIET, daughter to Capulet.

She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
How shall that faith return again to earth
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.

Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!

your mother?
Nurse. Your mother.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?

How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
[Lays him in the tomb.]
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;

I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes

What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
I will not entertain so bad a thought.

Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;

To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
On Thursday next be married to this County.
Friar L. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?

Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you note
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun

Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,

Lady Cap. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Afore me, It is so very very late

This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
To season love, that of it doth not taste!

Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
To sunder his that was thine enemy?

Enter ABRAM and BALTHASAR, two SERVINGMEN of the MONTAGUES.
with five or six other MASQUERS and TORCHBEARES.
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy

Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than

Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.

Romeo. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
Upon so soft a subject as myself!

The hateful mansion.
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.

Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE].
And this same needy man must sell it me.
[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE].
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

When it hoars ere it be spent.
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.

Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his

His son is thirty.
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.

But for the sunset of my brother's son
So early walking did I see your son.
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
Juliet. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,

Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
Ben. Of love?

Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,

Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
Lady Cap. We follow thee. [Exit a SERVINGMAN].
Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
Enter a SERVINGMAN.

Bal. Full half an hour.
[They fight.]
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
follow straight.

He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!

And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
If I did stay to look on his intents.
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;

Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
SCENE III.
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
SCENE III.

To be to thee this night a torchbearer
Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
Cousin Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
O, by this count I shall be much in years

He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe

Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;

And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
The only son of your great enemy.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,

Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Afore me, It is so very very late
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon

Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!

Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou

Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
That almost freezes up the heat of life.

remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow

When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Romeo. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh

Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee-
Romeo is coming.
Because it is an enemy to thee.

We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd

I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
And he shall signify from time to time
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Lady Cap. O woful time!

Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
Which, too much minded by herself alone,

Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.

shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!

"Where is your mother?"'
your mother?
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.

Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,

Romeo. Bid her devise
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Romeo. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,

Lady Cap. What is the matter?
Juliet. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!

Romeo. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.

By any other name would smell as sweet.
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
And not impute this yielding to light love,
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,

My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Make haste, I say.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!

CHORUS
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
Enter CHORUS.
2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs

By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
And from her womb children of divers kind
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.

Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more

As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.

All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
Lady Cap. She's not fourteen.
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,

ACT III.
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
SCENE III.
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;

me?
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;

Is partly to behold my lady's face,
Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
the argument no longer.

Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
Shalt with him hence.

And with this knife I'll help it presently.
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
Mer. I am hurt.
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt

Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Juliet. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;

Ser. Up.
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?

Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.

I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
Juliet. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?

Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?

Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Romeo. Nay, that's not so.
When presently through all thy veins shall run
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.

Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
Ben. Strike, drum.

Juliet. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Romeo. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,

Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
So far from sounding and discovery,
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.

Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost

And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
A visor for a visor! What care I
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.

Paris. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;

[PAGE whistes.]
Juliet. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.

Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.

Nurse. Peter!
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.

Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
Farewell.
Romeo. Whose house?
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell

We would as willingly give cure as know.
As I intended, for it wrought on her
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know
Live here in heaven and may look on her;

Is partly to behold my lady's face,
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;

Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.

Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come! [Knock.]
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.

Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
To meet her new beloved anywhere;

In what vile part of this anatomy
Juiet. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Cap. Will you tell me that?
Nurse. What?

Enter CAPULET.
Romeo. What hast thou found?
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Which then most sought where most might not be found,

A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul

That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
Such as I love; and you among the store,
Juliet. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Romeo. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.

Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
Nurse. [within] Madam!

wisely.
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
Peter. I will then give it you soundly.
Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?

The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Romeo. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.

[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.

Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS, with Musicians.
for, in the great chamber.

For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
If I did stay to look on his intents.

Ser. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read. [He reads the paper.]

Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Juliet. No, no. But all this did I know before.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Romeo. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.

Lady Cap. Good night.
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a

Enter NURSE hastily
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.

If I did stay to look on his intents.
Romeo. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.

In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
And her immortal part with angels lives.

Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS.
To County Paris, to prepare him up
[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].

I will omit no opportunity
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit

My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
Help, help! Call help.
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,

Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]

Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
When well apparell'd April on the heel

Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
am a pretty piece of flesh.

Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Samp. If you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.
Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Juliet. To answer that, I should confess to you.

Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!

Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
But, soft! what day is this?
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?

[Exeunt all but the NURSE and Musicians, casting rosemary
I do remember an apothecary,
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.

To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Such as I love; and you among the store,
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore

And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
More fierce and more inexorable far
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,

Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold
wall of any man or maid of Montague's.

Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
thumb, sir.

To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
After the prompter, for our entrance;

The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Cap. A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good

behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
A street.
Mantua. A street.

How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
And do not interrupt me in my course.
But he that hath the steerage of my course

Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
The County will be here with music straight,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
Mer. Right.

To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.

Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
Friar L. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.

Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
I'll to my rest.
The County Paris hath set up his rest

speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were

She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
Romeo. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
Juliet. What villain, madam?

The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
AN OLD MAN, of the Capulet family.

Romeo. Is she a Capulet?
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
And this same needy man must sell it me.
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.

Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Here's to my love! [He drinks.] O true apothecary!
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!

Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
O cousin, cousin!
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,

But every man betake him to his legs.
Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous

Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),

From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.

I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
Romeo. She speaks.
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.

As I intended, for it wrought on her
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
Paris. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.

Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Romeo. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
Romeo. What hast thou found?
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.

[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE].
Enter old MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE.
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
What mean these masterless and gory swords

Unless that husband send it me from heaven
As is a winged messenger of heaven
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.

Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Who is already sick and pale with grief
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief

Fetch me my rapier, boy. [Exit boy.] What, dares the slave
Juliet. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I

[Exeunt CAPULET and SERVINGMEN.]
Lady Cap. We follow thee. [Exit a SERVINGMAN].
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,

An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
That God had lent us but this only child;

Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,

much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. Exit.

This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,

Nurse. Is it good-den?
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO and Men.
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love

Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
Romeo. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love

Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye

Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Peter. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,

Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
But he that hath the steerage of my course
For I am sure you have your hands full all
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,

But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
And not impute this yielding to light love,
To make me die with a restorative. [She kisses him.]

Friar L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
A lover may bestride the gossamer
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!

But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
He made you for a highway to my bed;

Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow

[Exit.]
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
[Exit.]
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be

But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,

Romeo. Farewell!
Farewell.
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!

Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
Juliet. O comfortable Friar! where is my lord?
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?

This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!

Samp. [aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to

But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Romeo. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
She's not well married that lives married long,

Come, shall we go?
Mont. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
Which to the high topgallant of my joy

Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!

Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
After the prompter, for our entrance;
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.

Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
For sweet discourses in our time to come.

My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,

Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
Friar L. How long hath he been there?
Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!
If I departed not and left him there.

Juliet. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,

To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is
It may be thought we held him carelessly,

If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.

SCENE IV.
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
SCENE IV.
Hath had no notice of these accidents;

Depart again. Here, here will I remain
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit

[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that

And with my child my joys are buried.
How stands your disposition to be married?
O weraday that ever I was born!
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,

Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
What further woe conspires against mine age?
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
We cannot without circumstance descry.

With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
As will disperse itself through all the veins
Juliet. I would not for the world they saw thee here.

My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
Romeo. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.
[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]

Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
I will omit no opportunity
Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?

great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
Give me a case to put my visage in.
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear

And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,

Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Romeo. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.

1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Juliet. Indeed I never shall be satisfied

Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.

What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Friar L. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!

Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.
Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
DRAMATIS PERSONAE
Some comfort, nurse.

And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,

Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Romeo is coming.
To press before thy father to a grave?

Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Juliet. Blister'd be thy tongue

Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
Nurse. Anon, anon!

Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.

And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.

And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
Is very good meat in Lent;
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse

Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Juliet. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!

An she agree, within her scope of choice
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [He falls.]
Then dreams he of another benefice.
[She stabs herself and falls].

one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
Because he married me before to Romeo?
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a man
Shame come to Romeo!

Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;

Farewell, my coz.
This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.
Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.

Nurse. You say well.
Friar L. O, she knew well
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of

Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.

Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Ben. Strike, drum.

Romeo. My dear?
I do beseech thee-
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
And for that name, which is no part of thee,

You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
Shall be the label to another deed,
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
What, have you din'd at home?

And from her womb children of divers kind
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
[They retire behind].
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,

Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Was ever book containing such vile matter
Lady Cap. What is the matter?

To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.

Verona. FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
Romeo. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
But, soft! what day is this?

And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
But now I see this one is one too much,
master's kinsmen.
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,

Paris. Come you to make confession to this father?
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
This letter he early bid me give his father,
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.

[Exit.]
Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
[Exit.]
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,

Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,

Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
Romeo. Meaning, to cursy.
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,

I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
Did not attend him as we rode? I think

Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear

And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
Romeo. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
to hear it.

[singing] lady, lady, lady.
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!

The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
Enter JULIET alone.
their heads.
Enter ROMEO alone.

I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO and Men.
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!

O, by this count I shall be much in years
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Within this hour my man shall be with thee

And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
The County will be here with music straight,
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more

Ben. Strike, drum.
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Friar L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,

In shape no bigger than an agate stone
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.

Bal. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes

'Tis now near night.
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
Among fresh female buds shall you this night

Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.

Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Mer. A sail, a sail!
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
So stumblest on my counsel?

Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
Is guilty of this lamentable chance? The lady stirs.

[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]
Enter JULIET and NURSE.
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,

We would as willingly give cure as know.
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know
Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;

Romeo. Well, what was yours?
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.

Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how

Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
Friar L. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
Juliet. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.

What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
Shall I send to thee?
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.

Romeo. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,

Lady Cap. She's not fourteen.
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered

follow straight.
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
AN OLD MAN, of the Capulet family.
Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily

Uneven is the course; I like it not.
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
For here we need it not.
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,

Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there

[Exeunt.]
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
[Exeunt.]
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath

Romeo. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Examine every married lineament,
And that we have a curse in having her.
Piteous predicament!

Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
man to bow in the hams.
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
[NURSE calls within.]

Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Romeo. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,

Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
As is the night before some festival
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
moved.

Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?  [He rises]
JULIET rises.

Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,

That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Lady Cap. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!

By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!

This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,

Romeo. I will follow you.
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
And presently took post to tell it you.
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.

You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
After the prompter, for our entrance;

The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Romeo. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
And stole into the covert of the wood.

How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
Of one I danc'd withal.
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,

Apoth. Who calls so loud?
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Ben. In love?

I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night

Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.

O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
A street.
Mantua. A street.

Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.

Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Never was seen so black a day as this.

