your mother?
young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with
with five or six other MASQUERS and TORCHBEARES.
wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
wisely.
when 'twas a little prating thing - O, there is a nobleman in
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God.
wall.
wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
upon the prick of noon.
tutor me from quarrelling!
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
to hear it.
[to SECOND CAPULET]
thumb, sir.
thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
this that was so full of his ropery?
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
then enter three or four CITIZENS with clubs.
their heads.
their fingers.
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
the two.
the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
the argument no longer.
that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
that name, for fault of a worse.
that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with another
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
[singing] lady, lady, lady.
should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye
read anything you see?
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
on my side.
on Juliet and shutting the curtains.]
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
occasion.
new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall
narrow to an ell broad!
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
moved.
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a
mourners, and stay dinner.
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
minstrel.
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
me?
me.
master's kinsmen.
man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
man to bow in the hams.
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
is get afire by thine own ignorance,
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold
into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears
his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath
her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of
for, in the great chamber.
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
for the goose.
for sounding.
for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
follow straight.
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
fairly last night.
everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you
ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
ere it be out.
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
dared.
cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says
come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
bench? O, their bones, their bones!
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! Exit.
and all the GUESTS and GENTLEWOMEN to the Masquers.
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is
and a crow of iron.
an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
am a pretty piece of flesh.
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a man
'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
a letter?
a hole.
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
Your lady's love against some other maid
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
Young son, it argues a distempered head
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
You tallow-face!
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
Would through the airy region stream so bright
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
Without a sudden calm will overset
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
Within the infant rind of this small flower
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,
With this night's revels and expire the term
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
With open outcry, toward our monument.
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
With instruments upon them fit to open
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
Will I set up my everlasting rest
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
Why should you fall into so deep an O?  [He rises]
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
Why I descend into this bed of death
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will?
Who is already sick and pale with grief
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
Which you weep for.
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Which the commission of thy years and art
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
Which craves as desperate an execution
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
"Where is your mother?"'
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
When well apparell'd April on the heel
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
When presently through all thy veins shall run
When it hoars ere it be spent.
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
What, have you din'd at home?
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come! [Knock.]
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
What say you, Simon Catling?
What said my man when my betossed soul
What mean these masterless and gory swords
What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
What is your will?
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
What if this mixture do not work at all?
What if it be a poison which the friar
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
What further woe conspires against mine age?
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
Were in a mask?
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
We would as willingly give cure as know.
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
We took this mattock and this spade from him
We sucking on her natural bosom find;
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
We cannot without circumstance descry.
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
Watchman. [within.] Lead, boy. Which way?
1. Watchman. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
2. Watchman. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
1. Watchman. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
1. Watchman. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
1 Watchman. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Was ever book containing such vile matter
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
Warm and new kill'd.
Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
Verona. FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
Verona. CAPULET'S orchard.
Verona. A public place.
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the CAPULETS.
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him.
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
Unto the rigour of severest law.
Unto my cell.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in.
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'
Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me
Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
Tyb. I am for you. [He draws.]
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Two households, both alike in dignity,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
Turn from their office to black funeral-
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
Tomorrow will I send.
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
Together with the terror of the place-
To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
To this same place, to this same monument.
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
To stop the inundation of her tears,
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
To see thy son and heir more early down.
To see now how a jest shall come about!
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
To rid her from this second marriage,
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
To press before thy father to a grave?
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
To murther, murther our solemnity?
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
To meet her new beloved anywhere;
To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
To make me die with a restorative. [She kisses him.]
To make confession and to be absolv'd.
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
To lay one in, another out to have.
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
To help me sort such needful ornaments
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
To have her match'd; and having now provided
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
To bid me trudge.
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
To bear a poison, I would temper it-;
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
To be consorted with the humorous night.
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
To an impatient child that hath new robes
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
To Lammastide?
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
To County Paris, to prepare him up
'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
'Tis now near night.
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
Till we can clear these ambiguities
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss. [Exit.]
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
Thy lips are warm!
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [He falls.]
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [He Kisses her.]
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
Thursday let it be, a Thursday, tell her
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up; [Knock.]
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
Thou shalt be loggerhead! [Exit 2 Servingman.]
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
This is she-
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
This but begins the woe others must end.
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
[They whisper in his ear.]
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
[They retire behind].
They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
[They march about the stage and exeunt.]
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight. TYBALT falls.]
They are free men, but I am banished.
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
These dead men's tombs.
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
There shall no figure at such rate be set
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
Then, as the manner of our country is,
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Then music with her silver sound'-
'Then music with her silver sound
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Then gave I her - so tutored by my art -
Then dreams he of another benefice.
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
The which if you with patient ears attend,
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
The other did not so.
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
The only son of your great enemy.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
The most you sought was her promotion,
The more I have, for both are infinite.
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
The life of Tybalt.
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
The horrible conceit of death and night,
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
The hateful mansion.
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
The County will be here with music straight,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
The County Paris hath set up his rest
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
That were some spite; my invocation
That we may call it early by-and-by.
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
That plats the manes of horses in the night
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
That idles in the wanton summer air,
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
That he should hither come as this dire night
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
That ever ever I did yet behold!
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
That calls our person from our morning rest?
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
That all the world will be in love with night
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
That I yet know not?
That I will show you shining at this feast,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
That I must love a loathed enemy.
That I might touch that cheek!
That I have worn a visor and could tell
That God had lent us but this only child;
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
Take all myself.
TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.
THREE MUSICIANS.
THE PROLOGUE
THE ENDÿSweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Suspecting that we both were in a house
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
Such as I love; and you among the store,
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
Staying for thine to keep him company.
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
Stay not to question, for the Watch is coming.
Stay but a little, I will come again. [Exit JULIET above.]
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
Spare not for cost.
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
Some misadventure.
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
Some comfort, nurse.
Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
So stumblest on my counsel?
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
So please you, let me now be left alone,
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
So fearful were they of infection.
So far from sounding and discovery,
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
So early walking did I see your son.
So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
[Snatching ROMEO'S dagger.]
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
- Sirrah, fetch drier logs!
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
She's not well married that lives married long,
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
[She stabs herself and falls].
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
She shall be married to this noble earl.
[She kneels down.]
[She kneels down.]
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
[She goeth down from the window.]
[She falls upon her bed within the curtains.]
She could have run and waddled all about;
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
Shame come to Romeo!
Shalt with him hence.
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
Shall have the chinks.
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
Shall be the label to another deed,
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
Shall I send to thee?
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
Sev. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
Ser. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick
Ser. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
Ser. Up.
Ser. To supper, to our house.
1 Ser. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you
Ser. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich
Ser. My master's.
Ser. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
Ser. I know not, sir.
2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
Ser. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
Ser. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
Second Ser. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands,
Second Ser. Ay, boy, ready.
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
Samp. [aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
Samp. Well, sir.
Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Samp. If you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.
Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
Samp. Fear me not.
Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are
Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
SCENE VI.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE - Verona once in the fifth act, at Mantua.
SAMSON, servant to Capulet.
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,
Romeo?
Romeo. [to a SERVINGMAN] 
Romeo. [to JULIET].
Romeo. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Romeo. [ coming forward.]
Romeo. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Romeo. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Romeo. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Romeo. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
Romeo. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
Romeo. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
Romeo. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.
Romeo. Whose house?
Romeo. Whither?
Romeo. When the devout religion of mine eye
Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Romeo. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
Romeo. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
Romeo. What shall I swear by?
Romeo. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
Romeo. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
Romeo. What is her mother?
Romeo. What hast thou found?
Romeo. Well, what was yours?
Romeo. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
Romeo. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
Romeo. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
Romeo. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
Romeo. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Romeo. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Romeo. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
Romeo. This shall determine that.
Romeo. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
Romeo. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,
Romeo. There is no world without Verona walls,
Romeo. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Romeo. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Romeo. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read. [He reads the paper.]
Romeo. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Romeo. So thrive my soul-
Romeo. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Romeo. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
Romeo. She speaks.
Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
Romeo. Pink for flower.
Romeo. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Romeo. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a
Romeo. Out-
Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Romeo. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
Romeo. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Romeo. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
Romeo. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!
Romeo. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
Romeo. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
Romeo. Nurse.
Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee-
Romeo. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
Romeo. Not having that which having makes them short.
Romeo. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
Romeo. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
Romeo. No matter. Get thee gone
Romeo. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Romeo. Nay, that's not so.
Romeo. Nay, good goose, bite not!
Romeo. My dear?
Romeo. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
Romeo. Meaning, to cursy.
Romeo. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
Romeo. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
Romeo. Is the day so young?
Romeo. Is she a Capulet?
Romeo. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
Romeo. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
Romeo. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Romeo. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
Romeo. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Romeo. If my heart's dear love-
Romeo. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
Romeo. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
Romeo. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
Romeo. I would I were thy bird.
Romeo. I will follow you.
Romeo. I thought all for the best.
Romeo. I take thee at thy word.
Romeo. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the
Romeo. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
Romeo. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
Romeo. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
Romeo. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
Romeo. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
Romeo. I dreamt a dream to-night.
Romeo. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
Romeo. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
Romeo. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have
Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
Romeo. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Romeo. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Romeo. Here's goodly gear!
Romeo. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
Romeo. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';
Romeo. Good morrow, father.
Romeo. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Romeo. Good heart, at what?
Romeo. Go to! I say you shall.
Romeo. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Romeo. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
Romeo. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
Romeo. For your broken shin.
Romeo. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
Romeo. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
Romeo. Farewell!
Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
Romeo. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Romeo. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
Romeo. Commend me to thy lady.
Romeo. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
Romeo. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Romeo. By the hour of nine.
Romeo. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
Romeo. By a name
Romeo. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
Romeo. Bid her devise
Romeo. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
Romeo. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Romeo. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
Romeo. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
Romeo. As if that name,
Romeo. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Romeo. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Romeo. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
Romeo. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
Romeo. And bad'st me bury love.
Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Romeo. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
Romeo. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
Romeo. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Romeo. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Romeo. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
Romeo. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
Romeo. A most courteous exposition.
Romeo. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will
Romeo. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Romeo. 'Tis the way
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
Romeo!
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
Romeo opens the tomb.
Romeo is coming.
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
Romeo and Juliet
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
ROMEO, son to Montague.
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
Prince. This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Prince. And for that offence
Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!
Poor John. Draw thy tool - Here comes two of the house of
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
Piteous predicament!
Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
Peter. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron
Peter. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full
Peter. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say  for you. It
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
Peter. I will then give it you soundly.
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon
Peter. Anon.
Peter. Anon.
Pet. You will not then?
Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Paris. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
Paris. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Paris. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
Paris. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Paris. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
Paris. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
Paris. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
Paris. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
Paris. My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Paris. My father Capulet will have it so,
Paris. Monday, my lord.
Paris. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Paris. I do defy thy, conjuration
Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Paris. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
Paris. God shield I should disturb devotion!
Paris. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.
Paris. Do not deny to him that you love me.
Paris. Come you to make confession to this father?
Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Page. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.
Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
PROLOGUE
PETER, servant to Juliet's nurse.
[PARIS strews the tomb with flowers.]
[PARIS retires.]
[PAGE whistes.]
PAGE to Paris; another PAGE, an OFFICER.
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
Out on her, hilding!
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
Or, if I live, is it not very like
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
Or shall we on without apology?
Or shall I come to you at evening mass
Or never after look me in the face.
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet. [PARIS dies.]
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
One that you love.
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
One of our order, to associate me
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
On the forefinger of an alderman,
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
On Thursday next be married to this County.
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
Of yonder knight?
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
Of one I danc'd withal.
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
Of disobedient opposition
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
Of dear import; and the neglecting it
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
O, what more favour can I do to thee
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
O, by this count I shall be much in years
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
O woful day! O woful day!
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones
O weraday that ever I was born!
O that she knew she were!
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
O son, the night before thy wedding day
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
O cousin, cousin!
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
O anything, of nothing first create!
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
Nurse. [within] Madam!
Nurse. [within] Madam!
Nurse. [Within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
Nurse. Your mother.
Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
Nurse. You say well.
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
Nurse. What?
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Nurse. There's no trust,
Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Nurse. Romeo can,
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]
Nurse. Peter!
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
Nurse. May not one speak?
Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done. Exit.
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Nurse. Madam!
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Nurse. Is it good-den?
Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
Nurse. I speak no treason.
Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
Nurse. I know not.
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
Nurse. Faith, here it is.
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
Nurse. Even so lies she,
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,' quoth
Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords. [Throws them down.]
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
Nurse. Anon, anon!
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Nurse!- What should she do here?
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Now  fellow, what is there?
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Not half so big as a round little worm
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
None but for some, and yet all different.
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
Never was seen so black a day as this.
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
NURSE to Juliet.
[NURSE goes to the curtains.]
[NURSE calls within.]
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
My will to her consent is but a part.
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
My life were better ended by their hate
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
[Music plays, and they dance.]
1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
1. Mus. What will you give us?
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
1. Mus. No.
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
1 Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Most lamentable day, most woful day
Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
More torches here! - Come on then, let's to bed.
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
More fierce and more inexorable far
Montagues.
Mont. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
Mont. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Mont. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
Mont. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
Mont. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Mont. I neither know it nor can learn of him
Mont. But I can give thee more;
Mont. Both by myself and many other friend;
Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
Mer. Why, may one ask?
Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
Mer. Right.
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was
Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for
Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
Mer. I am hurt.
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Mer. He is wise,
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
Mer. By my heel, I care not.
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Mer. And so did I.
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
Mer. A sail, a sail!
Mer. A challenge, on my life.
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
May be put from her by society.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
Many for many virtues excellent,
Mantua. A street.
Making them women of good carriage.
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Make haste, I say.
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
Madam, if you could find out but a man
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.
MERCUTIO, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.
MASQUERS, TORCHBEARES, GUARDS, WATCHMEN, and ATTENDANTS
Lucio and the lively Helena.'
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
Like softest music to attending ears!
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Let two more summers wither in their pride
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
[Lays him in the tomb.]
[Lays down a knife.]
Lady Mont. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Lady Mont. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
Lady Cap. You are too hot.
Lady Cap. Why, how now, Juliet?
Lady Cap. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
Lady Cap. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
Lady Cap. What noise is here?
Lady Cap. What is the matter?
Lady Cap. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
Lady Cap. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
Lady Cap. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
Lady Cap. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.
Lady Cap. We follow thee. [Exit a SERVINGMAN].
Lady Cap. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Lady Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
Lady Cap. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Lady Cap. That same villain Romeo.
Lady Cap. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
Lady Cap. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Lady Cap. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Lady Cap. She's not fourteen.
Lady Cap. O woful time!
Lady Cap. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Lady Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
Lady Cap. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Lady Cap. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
Lady Cap. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
Lady Cap. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
Lady Cap. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Lady Cap. Ho, daughter! are you up?
Lady Cap. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
Lady Cap. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Lady Cap. Good night.
Lady Cap. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Lady Cap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
Lady Cap. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Lady Cap. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
Lady Cap. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
Lady Cap. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Lady Cap. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Lady Cap. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
Lady Cap. A fortnight and odd days.
Lady Cap. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
[Knock.]
[Knock.]
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-
Just in her case!
Juliet. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.
Juliet. You kiss by th' book.
Juliet. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
Juliet. Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
Juliet. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
Juliet. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
Juliet. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
Juliet. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Juliet. What's he that now is going out of door?
Juliet. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Juliet. What villain, madam?
Juliet. What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Juliet. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
Juliet. What must be shall be.
Juliet. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
Juliet. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
Juliet. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
Juliet. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
Juliet. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
Juliet. To answer that, I should confess to you.
Juliet. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
Juliet. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
Juliet. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Juliet. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
Juliet. The tears have got small victory by that,
Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
Juliet. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
Juliet. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
Juliet. Sweet, so would I.
Juliet. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Juliet. Romeo!
Juliet. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
Juliet. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
Juliet. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
Juliet. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
Juliet. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
Juliet. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Juliet. O comfortable Friar! where is my lord?
Juliet. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
Juliet. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
Juliet. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
Juliet. Nurse?
Juliet. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
Juliet. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
Juliet. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
Juliet. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Juliet. No, no. But all this did I know before.
Juliet. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
Juliet. My only love, sprung from my only hate!
Juliet. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Juliet. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Juliet. Madam, I am not well.
Juliet. Madam, I am here.
Juliet. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Juliet. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
Juliet. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.
Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
Juliet. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
Juliet. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Juliet. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
Juliet. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
Juliet. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Juliet. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
Juliet. I will confess to you that I love him.
Juliet. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Juliet. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
Juliet. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
Juliet. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Juliet. How now? Who calls?
Juliet. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Juliet. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
Juliet. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
Juliet. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Juliet. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
Juliet. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
Juliet. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
Juliet. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
Juliet. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Juliet. Feeling so the loss,
Juliet. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
Juliet. Do not swear at all;
Juliet. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Juliet. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Juliet. Can heaven be so envious?
Juliet. By-and-by I come.-
Juliet. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
Juliet. But to be frank and give it thee again.
Juliet. Blister'd be thy tongue
Juliet. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
Juliet. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Juliet. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands
Juliet. Ay me!
Juliet. At what o'clock to-morrow
Juliet. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
Juliet. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
Juliet. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
Juliet. Amen!
Juliet. A thousand times good night! [Exit JULIET above].
Juliet. A rhyme I learnt even now
Juliet. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Juliet, the County stays.
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Jul. I have.
Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
Juiet. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
Juiet. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
JULIET, daughter to Capulet.
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET rises.
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
It rains downright.
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
It is supposed the fair creature died-
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
It is my lady; O, it is my love!
It is enough I may but call her mine.
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
Is very good meat in Lent;
Is too much for a score
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
Is my dear son with such sour company.
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
Is he gone and hath nothing?
Is guilty of this lamentable chance? The lady stirs.
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
Is empty on the back of Montague,
Is death to any he that utters them.
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
Is but a little way above our heads,
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
In what vile part of this anatomy
In what I farther shall intend to do,
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
In this so sudden business.
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
In such a gorgeous palace!
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
In my behalf- my reputation stain'd
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
In all her best array bear her to church;
Immediately we do exile him hence.
If, rather than to marry County Paris
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
If ever you disturb our streets again,
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
If be be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
If I did stay to look on his intents.
If I departed not and left him there.
I- measuring his affections by my own,
I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout
I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
I'll to my rest.
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
I'll not endure him.
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
I would the fool were married to her grave!
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
I would not for the wealth of all this town
I would have been abed an hour ago.
I would adventure for such merchandise.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
I will omit no opportunity
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you note
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
I was your mother much upon these years
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
I wake before the time that Romeo
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
I think you are happy in this second match,
I think it best you married with the County.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
I promise you, but for your company,
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
I have no joy of this contract to-night.
I have more care to stay than will to go.
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
I drew to part them. In the instant came
I dreamt my master and another fought,
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
I do remember well where I should be,
I do remember an apothecary,
I do beseech thee-
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
I conjure only but to raise up him.
I come from Lady Juliet.
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
How stands your disposition to be married?
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
How shall that faith return again to earth
How oft when men are at the point of death
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
How long is't now since last yourself and I
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
His son was but a ward two years ago.
His son is thirty.
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. [Retires.]
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. Exit.
Hie you to church; I must another way,
Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
Here's to my love! [He drinks.] O true apothecary!
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
Here in this city visiting the sick,
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure. [Retires.]
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
Her mother is the lady of the house.
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
Help, help! Call help.
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
[He walks by them and sings.]
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
He made you for a highway to my bed;
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
[He leaps the orchad-wall.]
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
[He goes down.]
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
Have at thee, coward!
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
Greg. [aside to SAMSON] No.
Greg. [aside to SAMPSON] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my
Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.
Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
Greg. The heads of the maids?
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
Good night.
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
-Good faith! 'Tis day! [Play music.]
Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second
-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
[Giving back the paper.]
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
Give me my sin again. [He Kisses her.]
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
Give me a case to put my visage in.
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
GREGORY, servant to Capulet.
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.
Friar L. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Friar L. Who is it?
Friar L. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
Friar L. Welcome then.
Friar L. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
Friar L. Too familiar
Friar L. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Friar L. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends
Friar L. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Friar L. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
Friar L. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
Friar L. That's a certain text.
Friar L. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
Friar L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
Friar L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
Friar L. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
Friar L. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Friar L. Romeo!
Friar L. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Friar L. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
Friar L. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Friar L. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Friar L. O, she knew well
Friar L. O woeful sympathy!
Friar L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Friar L. Now, must I to the monument alone.
Friar L. Not in a grave
Friar L. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
Friar L. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Friar L. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Friar L. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Friar L. I am the greatest, able to do least,
Friar L. How long hath he been there?
Friar L. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Friar L. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
Friar L. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
Friar L. Hold thy desperate hand.
Friar L. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
Friar L. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Friar L. Go with me to the vault.
Friar L. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
Friar L. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
Friar L. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Friar L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
Friar L. Benedicite!
Friar L. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
Friar L. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
Friar L. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
Friar L. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
Friar J. I could not send it- here it is again-
Friar J. Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho!
Friar J. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
Friar J. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee. [Exit.]
Forth Ser. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
Forgetting any other home but this.
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
For you and I are past our dancing days.
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
For who is living, if those two are gone?
For well you know this is a pitiful case. [Exit.]
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
For this time all the rest depart away.
For this night's watching.
For this alliance may so happy prove
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
For so he said he would. I hear him near.
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
For never was a story of more woe
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
For it was bad enough before their spite.
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
For in a minute there are many days.
For here we need it not.
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
For fair without the fair within to hide.
For exile hath more terror in his look,
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
For I have need of many orisons
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
For I am sure you have your hands full all
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
First Ser. You are looke't for and call'd for, ask't for and sought
First Ser. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
First Ser. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
Find written in the margent of his eyes,
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
Fetch me my rapier, boy. [Exit boy.] What, dares the slave
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
Farewell.
Farewell, my coz.
Farewell, dear father.
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
[FRIAR stoops and looks on the blood and weapons.]
FRIAR LAURENCE, a Franciscan.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S  cell.
FRIAR JOHN, of the same order.
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].
Exit TYBALT [with his followers].
[Exit ROMEO.]
[Exit PAGE]
[Exit PAGE.]
[Exit NURSE.]
[Exit JULIET.]
[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE].
[Exit BALTHASAR].
[Exit  Servingman.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt all but the NURSE and Musicians, casting rosemary
[Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE and BENVOLIO].
[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].
Exeunt [LADY CAPULETMother and NURSE.]
[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE].
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO.]
[Exeunt LADY CAPULET and NURSE.]
[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]
[Exeunt CAPULET and SERVINGMEN.]
[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].
[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]
Examine other beauties.
Examine every married lineament,
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Evermore showring? In one little body
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
Environed with all these hideous fears,
[Enter three or four SERVINGMEN with spits and logs and baskets.]
Enter the PRINCE [and ATTENDANTS].
Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;
Enter old MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE.
Enter old CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET.
Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter a SERVINGMAN.
Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.
Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter TYBALT and others.
Enter SAMSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO, and BALTHASAR with a torch, a mattock
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO,
Enter ROMEO and JULIET aloft at the window.
Enter ROMEO alone.
Enter Prince ESCALUS with his TRAIN.
Enter PRINCE, MONTAGUE, CAPULET,  their WIVES and ALL.
Enter PETER.
Enter PARIS and his PAGE, with flowers and sweet water.
Enter NURSE.
Enter NURSE.
[Enter NURSE with cords, wringing her hands.]
Enter NURSE hastily
Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].
Enter NURSE [and PETER].
Enter MONTAGUE [and SERVANTS].
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO and Men.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
[Enter JULIET.]
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET somewhat fast and embraces Romeo.
Enter JULIET and NURSE.
Enter JULIET alone.
[Enter JULIET above.]
[Enter JULIET above at a window.]
[Enter JULIET above again].
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE].
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE], with lantern, crow and spade.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and ROMEO.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS, with Musicians.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE alone, with a basket.
Enter FRIAR JOHN.
Enter CITIZENS.
Enter CHORUS.
Enter CHORUS.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, JULIET, TYBALT, NURSE
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET and PARIS.
Enter CAPULET, COUNTY PARIS, and SERVANT - the ClOWN.
Enter CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.
Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO.
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.
Enter BALTHASAR, Romeo's man, booted.
Enter APOTHECARY.
Enter ABRAM and BALTHASAR, two SERVINGMEN of the MONTAGUES.
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
Either withdraw unto some private place
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Either be gone before the watch be set,
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
ESCALUS, Prince of Verona.
Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
Doting like me, and like me banished,
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Dost thou not laugh?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Do thou but call my resolution wise
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. Exit.
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Despised substance of divinest show!
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
DRAMATIS PERSONAE
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Cousin Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
Cousin Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Come, vial.
Come, shall we go?
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Come, go with me. [To the SERVANT, giving back a paper]
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!
Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
Cold death aside and with the other sends
Citizens. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.
Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
Chorus.
Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come
Cap. Young Romeo is it?
Cap. Will you tell me that?
Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.
Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
Cap. Tush, I will stir about,
Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now
Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
Cap. Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha.
Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit 1 Servingman.]
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
Cap. How canst thou try them so?
Cap. He shall be endur'd.
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,
Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
Cap. Go, begone. [Exit Servingman.]
Cap. Go to, go to!
Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:
Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,
Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-
Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
Cap. All things that we ordained festival
Cap. A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.
Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?
Can I demand.
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
Came he not home to-night?
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
Call, good Mercutio.
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
CITIZENS of Verona; KINSFOLK of both houses;
CHORUS
CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S house.
CAPULET'S house.
CAPULET'S house.
By urging me to fury. O, be gone!
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
By having him making yourself no less.
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
By any other name would smell as sweet.
But, soft! what day is this?
But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
But, let them measure us by what they will,
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
But when I came, some minute ere the time
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
But to the earth some special good doth give;
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.
But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
But to himself so secret and so close,
But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
But she's best married that dies married young.
But send him back.
But sadly tell me who.
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
But now I see this one is one too much,
But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
But not another sin upon my head
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
But my true love is grown to such excess
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
But love thee better than thou canst devise
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks. [Retiring.]
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
But he that hath the steerage of my course
But for the sunset of my brother's son
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
But every man betake him to his legs.
But come, young waverer, come go with me.
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
But a hare that is hoar
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
But Romeo may not. More validity,
But Romeo may not- he is banished.
But O, it presses to my memory
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
But I will write again to Mantua,
But I will watch you from such watching now.
But 'tis no wit to go.
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Black and portentous must this humour prove
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?
Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Ben. Why dost thou stay?
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
Ben. The what?
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
Ben. Strike, drum.
Ben. Stop there, stop there!
Ben. Soft! I will go along.
Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Ben. Romeo will answer it.
Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
Ben. Of love?
Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being
Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Ben. In love?
Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt. 
Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?
Ben. Groan? Why, no;
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
Ben. For what, I pray thee?
Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.
Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Ben. But new struck nine.
Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.
Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
Ben. And what to?
Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy
Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Being one too many by my weary self-
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!
Being held a foe, he may not have access
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Because he married me before to Romeo?
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,
Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
Bal. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
Bal. Romeo.
Bal. No, my good lord.
Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Bal. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
Bal. I dare not, sir.
Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Bal. Full half an hour.
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
BENVOLIO, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
Away to heaven respective lenity,
Away from light steals home my heavy son
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
At the prefixed hour of her waking
At some hours in the night spirits resort-
At my poor house look to behold this night
At home, abroad, alone, in company,
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?
As will disperse itself through all the veins
As violently as hasty powder fir'd
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
As living here and you no use of him.
As is the night before some festival
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
As is a winged messenger of heaven
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
As Phaeton would whip you to the West
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
As I remember, this should be the house.
As I intended, for it wrought on her
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Are made already mothers. By my count,
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
Apoth. Who calls so loud?
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
Anthony, and Potpan!
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
And yet I would it were to give again.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
And with my child my joys are buried.
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
And where the worser is predominant,
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
And usest none in that true use indeed
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
And turn'd that black word death to banishment.
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.
And thou art wedded to calamity.
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
And this same needy man must sell it me.
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
And then will I be general of your woes
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
And then in post he came from Mantua
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
And then down falls again.
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
And then I ran away to call the Watch.
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
And the rank poison of the old will die.
And the place death, considering who thou art,
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
And that we have a curse in having her.
And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
And that my master slew him.
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
And stole into the covert of the wood.
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
And soundly too. Your houses!
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
And soar with them above a common bound.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
And since that time it is eleven years,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
And she as much in love, her means much less
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
And see how one another lends content;
And see how be will take it at your hands.
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
And reason coldly of your grievances,
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
And private in his chamber pens himself,
And presently took post to tell it you.
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
And never from this palace of dim night
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
And makes himself an artificial night.
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
And light thee on the way to Mantua.
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
And let mischance be slave to patience.
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
And hither shall he come; and he and I
And his to me,
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
And here is come to do some villanous shame
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
And her immortal part with angels lives.
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
And he shall signify from time to time
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
And gave him what becomed love I might,
And from her womb children of divers kind
And for that name, which is no part of thee,
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
And fearfully did menace me with death
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
And do not interrupt me in my course.
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!
And by and by my master drew on him,
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
And bear this work of heaven with patience;
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
And an old hare hoar,
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
And all things change them to the contrary.
And all the better is it for the maid.
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
And I, for winking at you, discords too,
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
And I'll believe thee.
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
And I am proof against their enmity.
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
An she agree, within her scope of choice
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
An old hare hoar,
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
'An if a man did need a poison now
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
Alla stoccata carries it away. [He draws.]
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
All this I know; and to the marriage
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-
All our whole city is much bound to him.
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
After the prompter, for our entrance;
Afore me, It is so very very late
Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
Abram. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Abram. No better.
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abr. You lie.
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
AN OLD MAN, of the Capulet family.
AN APOTHECARY, of Mantua.
ACT V.
ACT IV.
ACT III.
ACT II.
ACT I.
ACT I  -  ACT II  -  ACT III  -  ACT IV  -  ACT V
ABRAM, servant to Montague.
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
'A was a merry man) took up the child.
A visor for a visor! What care I
A villain, that is hither come in spite
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
A street.
A street.
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
A room in CAPULET'S house.
A public place.
A precious ring- a ring that I must use
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
A lover may bestride the gossamer
A lightning before death. O, how may I
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
A hall in CAPULET'S house
A greater power than we can contradict
A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
A gentleman of princely parentage,
A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
A Street.
A Follower. Away Tybalt.
