THE ENDÿDRAMATIS PERSONAE
Enter another Whatchman with FRIAR LAURENCE.
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE.
[Exit FRIAR LAURENCE].
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE].
[Exit PAGE.]
[Exit PAGE]
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, JULIET, TYBALT, NURSE
Enter JULIET and NURSE.
[Exeunt JULIET and NURSE.]
[Exeunt all but JULIET and NURSE].
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
Enter LADY CAPULET and NURSE.
[Exeunt LADY CAPULET and NURSE.]
Enter CAPULET and NURSE.
Exeunt [LADY CAPULETMother and NURSE.]
Enter NURSE.
Enter NURSE.
[Exit NURSE.]
Enter old MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE.
[Exeunt MONTAGUE and LADY MONTAGUE].
THE PROLOGUE
PROLOGUE
hast more of the wild goose in one of thy wits than, I am sure, I
I will not budge for no man's pleasure, I.
Juliet. Yond light is not daylight; I know it, I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
SCENE I.
ACT I.
Mer. And so did I.
Juliet. Sweet, so would I.
And hither shall he come; and he and I
How long is't now since last yourself and I
A visor for a visor! What care I
And to't they go like lightning; for, ere I
Nurse. Lord, how my head aches! What a head have I!
Samp. Me they shall feel while I am able to stand; and 'tis known I
Cap. But Montague is bound as well as I,
Mer. Good King of Cats, nothing but one of your nine lives. That I
Alack, alack, is it not like that I,
A lightning before death. O, how may I
Juliet. And stint thou too, I pray thee, nurse, say I.
I am not I, if there be such an 'I';
Or those eyes shut that make thee answer 'I.'
Hath Romeo slain himself? Say thou but 'I,'
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
SCENE II.
ACT II.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
SCENE III.
ACT III.
SCENE VI.
Enter PRINCE, MONTAGUE, CAPULET,  their WIVES and ALL.
Romeo. [to a SERVINGMAN] 
Enter a SERVINGMAN.
Lady Cap. We follow thee. [Exit a SERVINGMAN].
[Exeunt CAPULET and SERVINGMEN.]
Enter FRIAR JOHN.
Enter Prince ESCALUS with his TRAIN.
Enter CAPULET, COUNTY PARIS, and SERVANT - the ClOWN.
Enter BENVOLIO and ROMEO.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
Enter ROMEO.
[Exit ROMEO.]
Enter ROMEO, MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO,
[Exeunt all but MONTAGUE, LADY MONTAGUE and BENVOLIO].
[Exeunt MERCUTIO and BENVOLIO.]
[Exit. MERCUTIO with BENVOLIO].
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter BENVOLIO.
Enter BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.
[Exeunt BENVOLIO and MERCUTIO.]
Enter BENVOLIO with MERCUTIO.
Romeo. Ay, nurse; what of that? Both with an R.
Enter [several Watchmen with] BALTHASAR.
[Exit BALTHASAR].
PAGE to Paris; another PAGE, an OFFICER.
Enter NURSE [and PETER].
Enter PETER.
Nurse. Peter, stay at the gate. [Exit PETER.]
Enter NURSE and her Man [PETER].
with five or six other MASQUERS and TORCHBEARES.
Enter ABRAM and BALTHASAR, two SERVINGMEN of the MONTAGUES.
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET and PARIS.
[Exeunt CAPULET and PARIS].
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS.
THREE MUSICIANS.
Enter CITIZENS.
Verona. A churchyard; in it the monument of the CAPULETS.
MASQUERS, TORCHBEARES, GUARDS, WATCHMEN, and ATTENDANTS
Enter the PRINCE [and ATTENDANTS].
Enter MONTAGUE [and SERVANTS].
CHORUS
Enter CHORUS.
Enter CHORUS.
Romeo. [to JULIET].
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
Enter JULIET.
[Enter JULIET.]
[Exit JULIET.]
[to SECOND CAPULET]
Enter old CAPULET in his gown, and LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter LADY CAPULET.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter CAPULET.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter TYBALT.
Enter CAPULET and LADY CAPULET [and SERVANT].
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
SCENE V.
ACT I  -  ACT II  -  ACT III  -  ACT IV  -  ACT V
ACT V.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
SCENE IV.
ACT IV.
Enter APOTHECARY.
mouse, a cat, to scratch a man to death! a braggart, a rogue, a
world. A plague o' both your houses! Zounds, a dog, a rat, a
in. Laura, to his lady, was but a kitchen wench (marry, she had a
any man's, yet his leg excels all men's; and for a hand and a
art as well as by nature. For this drivelling love is like a
Romeo. Pardon, good Mercutio. My business was great, and in such a
hath lain asleep in the sun. Didst thou not fall out with a
Mer. That's as much as to say, such a case as yours constrains a
Nurse. An 'a speak anything against me, I'll take him down, an 'a
Look to the bak'd meats, good Angelica;
For still thy eyes, which I may call the sea,
My bounty is as boundless as the sea,
Than empty tigers or the roaring sea.
As that vast shore wash'd with the farthest sea,
Cap. Mass, and well said! A merry whoreson, ha.
My fair niece Rosaline and Livia;
Lucio and the lively Helena.'
ESCALUS, Prince of Verona.
With all the admired beauties of Verona.
AN APOTHECARY, of Mantua.
And then in post he came from Mantua
Then weep no more. I'll send to one in Mantua,
Whose sale is present death in Mantua,
Shall Romeo bear thee hence to Mantua.
But I will write again to Mantua,
For then thou canst not pass to Mantua,
And light thee on the way to Mantua.
SCENE - Verona once in the fifth act, at Mantua.
My lord and you were then at Mantua.
And sleeps again. This is that very Mab
Her traces, of the smallest spider's web;
Dove-feather'd raven! wolvish-ravening lamb!
The orchard walls are high and hard to climb,
As one dead in the bottom of a tomb.
Anon comes one with light to ope the tomb;
But then a noise did scare me from the tomb,
[Lays him in the tomb.]
How if, when I am laid into the tomb,
Romeo opens the tomb.
The earth that's nature's mother is her tomb.
Poor living corse, clos'd in a dead man's tomb!
What is her burying gave, that is her womb;
Doth hurry from the fatal cannon's womb.
That monthly changes in her circled orb,
Made by the joiner squirrel or old grub,
-Good faith! 'Tis day! [Play music.]
For 'twas your heaven she should be advanc'd;
And weep ye now, seeing she is advanc'd
Romeo. Sin from my lips? O trespass sweetly urg'd!
But in that crystal scales let there be weigh'd
Have lost a brace of kinsmen. All are punish'd.
Of all my buried ancestors are pack'd;
Some five-and-twenty years, and then we mask'd.
And ere this hand, by thee to Romeo's seal'd,
Most detestable Death, by thee beguil'd,
Take up those cords. Poor ropes, you are beguil'd,
Both you and I, for Romeo is exil'd.
So Romeo would, were he not Romeo call'd,
Cap. Despis'd, distressed, hated, martyr'd, kill'd!
Warm and new kill'd.
O Prince! O husband! O, the blood is spill'd
Of my child's love. I think she will be rul'd
Since this same wayward girl is so reclaim'd.
And, in strong proof of chastity well arm'd,
From Love's weak childish bow she lives unharm'd.
Of fair demesnes, youthful, and nobly train'd,
In my behalf- my reputation stain'd
To you and your behests, and am enjoin'd
For whom, and not for Tybalt, Juliet pin'd.
For 'tis a throne where honour may be crown'd
The fiery Tybalt, with his sword prepar'd;
I thought thy disposition better temper'd.
Romeo. Why, then is my pump well-flower'd.
As violently as hasty powder fir'd
Death, lie thou there, by a dead man interr'd.
Cap. He shall be endur'd.
No faith, no honesty in men; all perjur'd,
Lest in this marriage he should be dishonour'd
Thou wast the prettiest babe that e'er I nurs'd.
A sin-absolver, and my friend profess'd,
Ah me! how sweet is love itself possess'd,
Myself condemned and myself excus'd.
Romeo. Tush, thou art deceiv'd.
To make confession and to be absolv'd.
Ben. I aim'd so near when I suppos'd you lov'd.
Which modern lamentation might have mov'd?
With gentle breath, calm look, knees humbly bow'd-
Friar L. [aside] I would I knew not why it should be slow'd.-
Cap. Come, stir, stir, stir! The second cock hath crow'd,
Is my poor heart so for a kinsman vex'd.
So that my speed to Mantua there was stay'd.
Call me but love, and I'll be new baptiz'd;
Let me be satisfied, is't good or bad?
With Romeo till I behold him- dead-
That ever I should live to see thee dead!
I dreamt my lady came and found me dead
Subtilly hath minist'red to have me dead,
But old folks, many feign as they were dead-
That the life-weary taker mall fall dead,
The noble Paris and true Romeo dead.
Alack the day! he's gone, he's kill'd, he's dead!
Nurse. Ah, weraday! he's dead, he's dead, he's dead!
Lady Cap. Alack the day, she's dead, she's dead, she's dead!
Ben. O Romeo, Romeo, brave Mercutio's dead!
Why followed not, when she said 'Tybalt's dead,'
Alas, alas! Help, help! My lady's dead!
Thy husband in thy bosom there lies dead;
Dead art thou, dead! alack, my child is dead,
Is Romeo slaught'red, and is Tybalt dead?
To rouse thee from thy bed, there art thou dead.
For whose dear sake thou wast but lately dead.
And Juliet bleeding, warm, and newly dead,
Young son, it argues a distempered head
What if her eyes were there, they in her head?
The sun for sorrow will not show his head.
But not another sin upon my head
As glorious to this night, being o'er my head,
And death, not Romeo, take my maidenhead!
With nimble soles; I have a soul of lead
Unwieldy, slow, heavy and pale as lead.
Ser. God gi' go-den. I pray, sir, can you read?
So shall no foot upon the churchyard tread
Nurse. O Tybalt, Tybalt, the best friend I had!
Fie, how my bones ache! What a jaunce have I had!
That living mortals, hearing them, run mad-
Torments him so that he will sure run mad.
Ben. Why, Romeo, art thou mad?
Lady Cap. Fie, fie! what, are you mad?
narrow to an ell broad!
Cap. What should it be, that they so shriek abroad?
A troubled mind drave me to walk abroad;
The day is hot, the Capulets abroad.
Juliet. Now, good sweet nurse- O Lord, why look'st thou sad?
My grave is like to be my wedding bed.
Come, cords; come, nurse. I'll to my wedding bed;
Or if you do not, make the bridal bed
Take thou this vial, being then in bed,
And, on my life, hath stol'n him home to bed.
And bid her hasten all the house to bed,
Wife, go you to her ere you go to bed;
Go you to Juliet ere you go to bed;
More torches here! - Come on then, let's to bed.
Ay, let the County take you in your bed!
The shady curtains from Aurora's bed,
So soon to bid good morrow to thy bed.
He made you for a highway to my bed;
Romeo, good night. I'll to my truckle-bed;
Why, lamb! why, lady! Fie, you slug-abed!
To have her match'd; and having now provided
1 Mus. Ay, by my troth, the case may be amended.
Shall be the label to another deed,
You are a saucy boy. Is't so, indeed?
And usest none in that true use indeed
Rather than Paris. These are news indeed!
Juliet. Three words, dear Romeo, and good night indeed.
cup draws him on the drawer, when indeed there is no need.
Get thee to bed, and rest; for thou hast need.
O, this same thought did but forerun my need,
In this resolve. I'll send a friar with speed
Go get thee to thy love, as was decreed,
'Tybalt is dead, and Romeo- banished.'
Doting like me, and like me banished,
They are free men, but I am banished.
Nurse. Tybalt is gone, and Romeo banished;
Romeo that kill'd him, he is banished.
But Romeo may not- he is banished.
All slain, all dead. 'Romeo is banished'-
To comfort thee, though thou art banished.
Friar L. Hence from Verona art thou banished.
But 'banished' to kill me- 'banished'?
That 'banished,' that one word 'banished,'
To mangle me with that word 'banished'?
Some shall be pardon'd, and some punished;
It is supposed the fair creature died-
And vice sometime's by action dignified.
As dearly as mine own, be satisfied.
Juliet. Indeed I never shall be satisfied
And then I hope thou wilt be satisfied.
Speak but one rhyme, and I am satisfied!
Romeo. O, wilt thou leave me so unsatisfied?
Virtue itself turns vice, being misapplied,
I'll know his grievance, or be much denied.
Juliet. Go ask his name.- If he be married,
How stands your disposition to be married?
And with my child my joys are buried.
Who here hath lain this two days buried.
Of stout Mercutio, and then Tybalt fled;
A plague o' both your houses! I am sped.
dared.
An hour but married, Tybalt murdered,
Your high displeasure. All this- uttered
Which the dark night hath so discovered.
Life and these lips have long been separated.
Juliet. O God!- O nurse, how shall this be prevented?
And hereabouts 'a dwells, which late I noted
Enter BALTHASAR, Romeo's man, booted.
Samp. I strike quickly, being moved.
moved.
I wonder at this haste, that I must wed
But I, a maid, die maiden-widowed.
thou fishified! Now is he for the numbers that Petrarch flowed
Prick'd from the lazy finger of a maid;
And all the better is it for the maid.
When King Cophetua lov'd the beggar maid!
Your lady's love against some other maid
Noting this penury, to myself I said,
She was too good for me. But, as I said,
Nay, I do bear a brain. But, as I said,
And bid me stand aloof, and so I did.
Nurse. It did, it did! alas the day, it did!
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.
Lady Cap. Well, well, thou hast a careful father, child;
'A was a merry man) took up the child.
But one, poor one, one poor and loving child,
Lady Cap. Tybalt, my cousin! O my brother's child!
That God had lent us but this only child;
O child! O child! my soul, and not my child!
The time and my intents are savage-wild,
much on the new form that they cannot sit at ease on the old
These griefs, these woes, these sorrows make me old.
Nurse. Now, by my maidenhead at twelve year old,
To wield old partisans, in hands as old,
With thy black mantle till strange love, grown bold,
Cap. Ha! let me see her. Out alas! she's cold,
For I will raise her Statue in pure gold,
Nor ope her lap to saint-seducing gold.
is 'music with her silver sound' because musicians have no gold
Give me some present counsel; or, behold,
That ever ever I did yet behold!
But not possess'd it; and though I am sold,
Hence banished is banish'd from the world,
My child is yet a stranger in the world,
So thou wilt woo; but else, not for the world.
And follow thee my lord throughout the world.
Doing more murther in this loathsome world,
young lady ask'd for, the nurse curs'd in the pantry, and
behaviour, as they say; for the gentlewoman is young; and
That villain cousin would have kill'd my husband.
And Tybalt's dead, that would have slain my husband.
Juiet. Shall I speak ill of him that is my husband?
Did murther her; as that name's cursed hand
And, touching hers, make blessed my rude hand.
What lady's that, which doth enrich the hand
Friar L. Hold thy desperate hand.
That lets it hop a little from her hand,
See how she leans her cheek upon her hand!
What's here? A cup, clos'd in my true love's hand?
On the white wonder of dear Juliet's hand
My dreams presage some joyful news at hand.
O that I were a glove upon that hand,
If I profane with my unworthiest hand
To think it was so? O, give me thy hand,
Cap. O brother Montague, give me thy hand.
What sorrow craves acquaintance at my hand
Can I demand.
Nurse. [Within] Let me come in, and you shall know my errand.
For Juliet's sake, for her sake, rise and stand!
Of some strange nature, letting it there stand
The measure done, I'll watch her place of stand
Greg. To move is to stir, and to be valiant is to stand.
flirt-gills; I am none of his skains-mates. And thou must stand
My lips, two blushing pilgrims, ready stand
His fault concludes but what the law should end,
Poison, I see, hath been his timeless end.
This but begins the woe others must end.
Romeo. Farewell, farewell! One kiss, and I'll descend.
When thou didst bower the spirit of a fiend
Juliet. Ancient damnation! O most wicked fiend!
I cannot choose but ever weep the friend.
Lady Cap. So shall you feel the loss, but not the friend
Mont. Both by myself and many other friend;
Mont. Not Romeo, Prince; he was Mercutio's friend;
The law, that threat'ned death, becomes thy friend
Juliet. Art thou gone so, my lord, my love, my friend?
Friar L. Bliss be upon you! Tell me, good my friend,
An you be mine, I'll give you to my friend;
What here shall miss, our toil shall strive to mend.
Rom. This day's black fate on moe days doth depend;
Tomorrow will I send.
The which if you with patient ears attend,
We sucking on her natural bosom find;
[They retire behind].
And from her womb children of divers kind
By their own beauties; or, if love be blind,
Friar L. You say you do not know the lady's mind.
Thou counterfeit'st a bark, a sea, a wind:
'God send me no need of thee!' and by the operation of the second
In truth, fair Montague, I am too fond,
There is no end, no limit, measure, bound,
And soar with them above a common bound.
To soar with his light feathers; and so bound
'To seek him here that means not to be found.
Which then most sought where most might not be found,
Romeo. What hast thou found?
Throw your mistempered weapons to the ground
Holding thine ear close to the hollow ground.
Of that tongue's utterance, yet I know the sound.
In that word's death; no words can that woe sound.
'Then music with her silver sound
Then music with her silver sound'-
Why 'silver sound'? Why 'music with her silver sound'?
1. Mus. Marry, sir, because silver hath a sweet sound.
He jests at scars that never felt a wound.
'When griping grief the heart doth wound,
warrant him, as gentle as a lamb. Go thy ways, wench; serve God.
Were of an age. Well, Susan is with God;
And in despite I'll cram thee with more food.
Shut up in Prison, kept without my food,
town, one Paris, that would fain lay knife aboard; but she, good
Nor what is mine shall never do thee good.
sententious of it, of you and rosemary, that it would do you good
Cap. A jealous-hood, a jealous-hood!
Friar L. Unhappy fortune! By my brotherhood,
Had she affections and warm youthful blood,
Pale, pale as ashes, all bedaub'd in blood,
Juliet. O God! Did Romeo's hand shed Tybalt's blood?
For then she could stand high-lone; nay, by th' rood,
And stole into the covert of the wood.
Romeo. O blessed, blessed night! I am afeard,
CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S orchard.
Verona. CAPULET'S orchard.
CAPULET'S orchard.
Have at thee, coward!
Romeo. [ coming forward.]
2. Watchman. Here's Romeo's man. We found him in the churchyard.
1 Watchman. 'the ground is bloody. Search about the churchyard.
And yet no farther than a wanton's bird,
Romeo. I would I were thy bird.
I bade her come. What, lamb! what ladybird!
Nurse. Well, sir, my mistress is the sweetest lady. Lord, Lord!
Nurse. Good heart, and I faith I will tell her as much. Lord,
Tyb. Romeo, the love I bear thee can afford
Juliet. Love give me strength! and strength shall help afford.
Bal. No, my good lord.
My dear-lov'd cousin, and my dearer lord?
To Mantua, with my letters to thy lord.
Paris. Monday, my lord.
Juliet. O comfortable Friar! where is my lord?
Hear me with patience but to speak a word.
Lady Cap. Talk not to me, for I'll not speak a word.
Tyb. What, drawn, and talk of peace? I hate the word
Had I it written, I would tear the word.
Mer. Tut! dun's the mouse, the constable's own word!
Speak to my gossip Venus one fair word,
Friar L. I'll give thee armour to keep off that word;
'Romeo is banished'- to speak that word
Romeo. I take thee at thy word.
Three civil brawls, bred of an airy word
Lady Cap. A crutch, a crutch! Why call you for a sword?
Ben. I do but keep the peace. Put up thy sword,
Apoth. Who calls so loud?
Bondage is hoarse and may not speak aloud;
Retorts it. Romeo he cries aloud,
And pluck the mangled Tybalt from his shroud.,
And hide me with a dead man in his shroud-
Ah, where's my man? Give me some aqua vitae.
I do remember well where I should be,
Juliet. What must be shall be.
And like her most whose merit most shall be;
Mer. Where the devil should this Romeo be?
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Italy; and as soon moved to be moody, and as soon moody to be
In one respect I'll thy assistant be;
He'll fright you up, i' faith. Will it not be?
Romeo. Peace, peace, Mercutio, peace!
Your lives shall pay the forfeit of the peace.
For men so old as we to keep the peace.
To lie discolour'd by this place of peace?
Prince. Rebellious subjects, enemies to peace,
Lady Cap. Enough of this. I pray thee hold thy peace.
Read o'er the volume of young Paris' face,
By playing it to me with so sour a face.
Come hither, cover'd with an antic face,
Or never after look me in the face.
Juliet. O serpent heart, hid with a flow'ring face!
Being spoke behind your back, than to your face.
Paris. Have I thought long to see this morning's face,
Is partly to behold my lady's face,
Romeo. In faith, I will. Let me peruse this face.
'Yea,' quoth he, 'dost thou fall upon thy face?
'Yea,' quoth my husband, 'fall'st upon thy face?
Juliet. Thou knowest the mask of night is on my face;
And what I spake, I spake it to my face.
You tallow-face!
In such a gorgeous palace!
Verona. A public place.
A public place.
Yet most suspected, as the time and place
Together with the terror of the place-
Either withdraw unto some private place
Sirrah, what made your master in this place?
Juliet. By whose direction found'st thou out this place?
To old Freetown, our common judgment place.
Nurse. Peter, take my fan, and go before, and apace.
Nurse. Peace, I have done. God mark thee to his grace!
Then dreams he of another benefice.
An she agree, within her scope of choice
Lies my consent and fair according voice.
Juiet. Hist! Romeo, hist! O for a falconer's voice
Juliet. If I do so, it will be of more price,
Than the death-darting eye of cockatrice.
Juliet. What's he that follows there, that would not dance?
Mer. Nay, gentle Romeo, we must have you dance.
[Music plays, and they dance.]
is get afire by thine own ignorance,
After the prompter, for our entrance;
Say either, and I'll stay the circumstance.
And thou dismemb'red with thine own defence.
Prince. And for that offence
My master knows not but I am gone hence,
Immediately we do exile him hence.
Shalt with him hence.
Or by the break of day disguis'd from hence.
May do much danger. Friar John, go hence,
And, being anger'd, puffs away from thence,
Bal. I do beseech you, sir, have patience.
And bear this work of heaven with patience;
And let mischance be slave to patience.
What, is my daughter gone to Friar Laurence?
But Romeo's name speaks heavenly eloquence.
Thy fault our law calls death; but the kind Prince,
And hear the sentence of your moved prince.
Juliet. O, break, my heart! poor bankrout, break at once!
Betroth'd and would have married her perforce
Mer. Thy wit is a very bitter sweeting; it is a most sharp sauce.
The roses in thy lips and cheeks shall fade
Paris. Younger than she are happy mothers made.
Cap. And too soon marr'd are those so early made.
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE], with lantern, crow and spade.
For fair without the fair within to hide.
Romeo. Do so, and bid my sweet prepare to chide.
Why, love, I say! madam! sweetheart! Why, bride!
Ere we may think her ripe to be a bride.
Shall happily make thee there a joyful bride.
He shall not make me there a joyful bride!
The fish lives in the sea, and 'tis much pride
Let two more summers wither in their pride
As he was coming from this churchyard side.
That westward rooteth from the city's side,
on my side.
Ben. See, where he comes. So please you step aside,
To Lammastide?
Come, bitter conduct; come, unsavoury guide!
Be patient, for the world is broad and wide.
Romeo. I do protest I never injur'd thee,
As I hate hell, all Montagues, and thee.
Condemned villain, I do apprehend thee.
For, by my soul, I'll ne'er acknowledge thee,
Give me the light. Upon thy life I charge thee,
To Juliet's grave; for there must I use thee.
And I'll believe thee.
Romeo. Tybalt, the reason that I have to love thee
And Paris too. Come, I'll dispose of thee
And for that name, which is no part of thee,
I do beseech thee-
Within this hour my man shall be with thee
Revive, look up, or I will die with thee!
It were a grief so brief to part with thee.
For fear of that I still will stay with thee
Samp. My naked weapon is out. Quarrel! I will back thee.
Romeo. What, shall I groan and tell thee?
There art thou happy. Tybalt would kill thee,
Juliet. Well, do not swear. Although I joy in thee,
That may convey my greetings, love, to thee.
Shall I send to thee?
By one that I'll procure to come to thee,
My love as deep; the more I give to thee,
Romeo, I come! this do I drink to thee.
O, what more favour can I do to thee
Because it is an enemy to thee.
Romeo. Nurse, commend me to thy lady and mistress. I protest unto thee-
Greg. No, marry. I fear thee!
Juliet. If they do see thee, they will murther thee.
Nor get a messenger to bring it thee,
Ben. For what, I pray thee?
Have you delivered to her our decree?
Nightly she sings on yond pomegranate tree.
Now will he sit under a medlar tree
Inherit at my house. Hear all, all see,
Prince. Look, and thou shalt see.
read anything you see?
Miscarried by my fault, let my old life
An envious thrust from Tybalt hit the life
And all those twenty could but kill one life.
That almost freezes up the heat of life.
Like death when he shuts up the day of life;
But heaven keeps his part in eternal life.
A pair of star-cross'd lovers take their life;
Lady Cap. O me, O me! My child, my only life!
Mer. A challenge, on my life.
[Lays down a knife.]
Hadst thou no poison mix'd, no sharp-ground knife,
'Twixt my extremes and me this bloody knife
Doth with their death bury their parents' strife.
Some twenty of them fought in this black strife,
And all things shall be well, I warrant thee, wife.
Cap. Soft! take me with you, take me with you, wife.
Thy tempest-tossed body. How now, wife?
Juliet. That may be, sir, when I may be a wife.
There stays a husband to make you a wife.
And she, there dead, that Romeo's faithful wife.
Call this a lightning? O my love! my wife!
Paris. Happily met, my lady and my wife!
What further woe conspires against mine age?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou comest to age;
Thou knowest my daughter's of a pretty age.
Out, you green-sickness carrion I out, you baggage!
Making them women of good carriage.
To rid her from this second marriage,
All this I know; and to the marriage
And in his wisdom hastes our marriage
In lasting labour of his pilgrimage!
And the continuance of their parents' rage,
Doth much excuse the appertaining rage
That quench the fire of your pernicious rage
Gentlemen, for shame! forbear this outrage!
A gentleman of princely parentage,
Where be these enemies? Capulet, Montage,
Is now the two hours' traffic of our stage;
Romeo. Ay, If I know the letters and the language.
To bid me trudge.
Our solemn hymns to sullen dirges change;
Than those that have more cunning to be strange.
grandsir, that we should be thus afflicted with these strange
Who had but newly entertain'd revenge,
The letter was not nice, but full of charge,
Ben. Thou wouldst else have made thy tale large.
And here I stand, both to impeach and purge
I never should forget it. 'Wilt thou not, Jule?' quoth he,
Tybalt, that murtherer, which way ran he?
Nurse. Mistress! what, mistress! Juliet! Fast, I warrant her, she.
That thou her maid art far more fair than she.
Nurse. Even so lies she,
This is she-
The earth hath swallowed all my hopes but she;
the very first house, of the first and second cause. Ah, the
wench's black eye; shot through the ear with a love song; the
Samp. A dog of that house shall move me to stand. I will take the
Romeo. I stretch it out for that word 'broad,' which, added to the
Greg. That shows thee a weak slave; for the weakest goes to the
2. Mus. Hang him, Jack! Come, we'll in here, tarry for the
Mer. More than Prince of Cats, I can tell you. O, he's the
Mer. Thou art like one of these fellows that, when he enters the
Peter. No money, on my faith, but the gleek. I will give you the
That fair for which love groan'd for and would die,
I must be gone and live, or stay and die.
This is thy sheath; there rust, and let me die.
Give me my Romeo; and, when he shall die,
My daughter he hath wedded. I will die
And the rank poison of the old will die.
This is the truth, or let Benvolio die.
Be not so long to speak. I long to die
And so did I. Well, we were born to die.
If all else fail, myself have power to die.
And these, who, often drown'd, could never die,
Obey, and go with me; for thou must die.
Chorus. Now old desire doth in his deathbed lie,
Mer. That dreamers often lie.
We see the ground whereon these woes do lie,
And where care lodges sleep will never lie;
Cap. As rich shall Romeo's by his lady's lie-
Where all the kindred of the Capulets lie.
And the demesnes that there adjacent lie,
Abr. You lie.
Mer. Consort? What, dost thou make us minstrels? An thou make
Juliet. Saints do not move, though grant for prayers' sake.
Nurse. I will tell her, sir, that you do protest, which, as I take
Romeo. Then move not while my prayer's effect I take.
Then is it likely thou wilt undertake
Within this three hours will fair Juliet wake.
In the mean time, against thou shalt awake,
Or, if I live, is it not very like
Romeo. Neither, fair saint, if either thee dislike.
Greg. But thou art not quickly moved to strike.
Nor no without-book prologue, faintly spoke
Believe me, love, it was the nightingale.
Either my eyesight fails, or thou look'st pale.
Is not so long as is a tedious tale.
Lest that thy love prove likewise variable.
Take heed, take heed, for such die miserable.
If that thy bent of love be honourable,
Things that, to hear them told, have made me tremble-
As in a vault, an ancient receptacle
To raise a spirit in his mistress' circle
Prince. Seal up the mouth of outrage for a while,
What, with a torch? Muffle me, night, awhile.
Nurse. I am aweary, give me leave awhile.
Lady Cap. This is the matter- Nurse, give leave awhile,
Nurse. Jesu, what haste! Can you not stay awhile?
Juliet. O Fortune, Fortune! all men call thee fickle.
a hole.
Mer. The fee simple? O simple!
When it did taste the wormwood on the nipple
Where on a sudden one hath wounded me
One of our order, to associate me
Tyb. You shall find me apt enough to that, sir, an you will give me
That you shall rest but little. God forgive me!
Paris. So will ye, I am sure, that you love me.
Paris. Do not deny to him that you love me.
Towards him I made; but he was ware of me
And flourishes his blade in spite of me.
What early tongue so sweet saluteth me?
Graze where you will, you shall not house with me.
Tyb. What wouldst thou have with me?
You, Capulet, shall go along with me;
Or manage it to part these men with me.
Come, cordial and not poison, go with me
Citizen. Up, sir, go with me.
But come, young waverer, come go with me.
And she, too desperate, would not go with me,
Romeo. What wilt thou tell her, nurse? Thou dost not mark me.
By leaving earth? Comfort me, counsel me.
Murder'd her kinsman. O, tell me, friar, tell me,
And gladly shunn'd who gladly fled from me.
Romeo. But that a joy past joy calls out on me,
My true-love passion. Therefore pardon me,
I am too young, I pray you pardon me'!
Friar L. Stay then; I'll go alone. Fear comes upon me.
To County Paris. Then comes she to me
Lady Cap. Nurse, where's my daughter? Call her forth to me.
But thou shalt hear it. Whistle then to me,
Prodigious birth of love it is to me
And his to me,
Therefore thy kinsmen are no let to me.
Speak not, reply not, do not answer me!
Here are the beetle brows shall blush for me.
me?
Samp. A dog of the house of Montague moves me.
And smilest upon the stroke that murders me.
And this same needy man must sell it me.
I'll call them back again to comfort me.
of woe.' O, play me some merry dump to comfort me.
Nurse. Now, afore God, I am so vexed that every part about me
Juliet. Ay me!
I drew to part them. In the instant came
Tyb. Why, uncle, 'tis a shame.
For such a wish! He was not born to shame.
Be quiet, or- More light, more light!- For shame!
A thing like death to chide away this shame,
And here is come to do some villanous shame
And this shall free thee from this present shame,
Is fair and honest: in his mistress' name,
Romeo. By a name
Belonging to a man. O, be some other name!
With repetition of my Romeo's name.
Romeo. As if that name,
Deny thy father and refuse thy name!
Without that title. Romeo, doff thy name;
Ah, poor my lord, what tongue shall smooth thy name
Romeo. It is my soul that calls upon my name.
me.
1. Mus. What a pestilent knave is this same?
Lady Cap. Marry, that 'marry' is the very theme
Where thou shalt live till we can find a time
Therefore, out of thy long-experienc'd time,
here writ. I must to the learned. In good time!
But when I came, some minute ere the time
Lady Cap. O woful time!
And he shall signify from time to time
Lady Cap. Ay, you have been a mouse-hunt in your time;
Be sacrific'd, some hour before his time,
We shall be much unfurnish'd for this time.
You must contrary me! Marry, 'tis time.-
Juiet. And joy comes well in such a needy time.
Juliet. By-and-by I come.-
My lord, I'll tell my lady you will come.
And keep her at my cell till Romeo come-
For sweet discourses in our time to come.
Cap. For shame, bring Juliet forth; her lord is come.
Cap. My sword, I say! Old Montague is come
Is three long hours; yet she is not come.
Capulet; and if you be not of the house of Montagues, I pray come
A fair assembly. Whither should they come?
What, have you din'd at home?
In fair Verona, where we lay our scene,
And all combin'd, save what thou must combine
But I'll amerce you with so strong a fine
And he will make the face of heaven so fine
If e'er thou wast thyself, and these woes thine,
Romeo. Thou chid'st me oft for loving Rosaline.
Friar L. God pardon sin! Wast thou with Rosaline?
Thou and these woes were all for Rosaline.
Hath wash'd thy sallow cheeks for Rosaline!
Mer. Why, that same pale hard-hearted wench, that Rosaline,
That you shall all repent the loss of mine.
Friar L. For doting, not for loving, pupil mine.
And make her airy tongue more hoarse than mine
As mine on hers, so hers is set on mine,
It is enough I may but call her mine.
Romeo. Th' exchange of thy love's faithful vow for mine.
Romeo. That last is true-the sweeter rest was mine.
Romeo. By the hour of nine.
Ben. But new struck nine.
Jesu Maria! What a deal of brine
Mercutio and his brother Valentine;
Which, on more view of many, mine, being one,
Till Holy Church incorporate two in one.
And, in this rage, with some great kinsman's bone
The game was ne'er so fair, and I am done.
We are undone, lady, we are undone!
By urging me to fury. O, be gone!
In dear employment. Therefore hence, be gone.
Ben. Romeo, away, be gone!
We'll measure them a measure, and be gone.
1. Mus. Faith, we may put up our pipes and be gone.
Cap. Nay, gentlemen, prepare not to be gone;
Therefore stay yet; thou need'st not to be gone.
Juliet. 'Tis almost morning. I would have thee gone-
Romeo. No matter. Get thee gone
Come, let's away; the strangers all are gone.
For who is living, if those two are gone?
Fly hence and leave me. Think upon these gone;
Go in; and tell my lady I am gone,
Such as would please. 'Tis gone, 'tis gone, 'tis gone!
Enter ROMEO alone.
Enter JULIET alone.
Page. [aside] I am almost afraid to stand alone
Tomorrow night look that thou lie alone;
I'll not to bed to-night; let me alone.
My lord, we must entreat the time alone.
Which, too much minded by herself alone,
As maids call medlars when they laugh alone.
Return'd my letter back. Then all alone
Cap. Content thee, gentle coz, let him alone.
My dismal scene I needs must act alone.
So please you, let me now be left alone,
Friar L. Now, must I to the monument alone.
For, by your leaves, you shall not stay alone
To such a greeting. Villain am I none.
I sell thee poison; thou hast sold me none.
May stand in number, though in reck'ning none.
My bosom's lord sits lightly in his throne,
In shape no bigger than an agate stone
A bump as big as a young cock'rel's stone;
It is the lark that sings so out of tune,
That is renown'd for faith? Be fickle, Fortune,
Lady Mont. Thou shalt not stir one foot to seek a foe.
Tyb. Uncle, this is a Montague, our foe;
My intercession likewise steads my foe.
For never was a story of more woe
I cannot bound a pitch above dull woe.
Your tributary drops belong to woe,
Brief sounds determine of my weal or woe.
I have forgot that name, and that name's woe.
Friar L. Hold, daughter. I do spy a kind of hope,
Samp. 'Tis true; and therefore women, being the weaker vessels, are
Because their breaths with sweetmeats tainted are.
his nets; but I am sent to find those persons whose names are
Call Peter; he will show thee where they are.
Then love-devouring death do what he dare-
And go, Sir Paris. Every one prepare
Which she hath prais'd him with above compare
But that thou overheard'st, ere I was ware,
With worms that are thy chambermaids. O, here
If any of my kinsmen find thee here.
Juliet. I would not for the world they saw thee here.
Bal. As I did sleep under this yew tree here,
And but thou love me, let them find me here.
By holy Laurence to fall prostrate here
Juliet. Madam, I am here.
Tyb. Thou, wretched boy, that didst consort him here,
Vile earth, to earth resign; end motion here,
And apprehend thee for a felon here.
Nurse!- What should she do here?
Where shall we dine? O me! What fray was here?
Every good hap to you that chances here.
Friar L. Holy Saint Francis! What a change is here!
Lady Cap. What noise is here?
Romeo. 'Tis torture, and not mercy. Heaven is here,
Romeo. Can I go forward when my heart is here?
Romeo. Tut! I have lost myself; I am not here:
And death's pale flag is not advanced there.
Was woe enough, if it had ended there;
Juliet. I shall forget, to have thee still stand there,
Nurse. This afternoon, sir? Well, she shall be there.
If I departed not and left him there.
Friar L. How long hath he been there?
Ben. Stop there, stop there!
Have my old feet stumbled at graves! Who's there?
Now  fellow, what is there?
Romeo. Thou wast never with me for anything when thou wast not there
No, No! This shall forbid it. Lie thou there.
This is not Romeo, he's some other where.
To meet her new beloved anywhere;
Your first is dead- or 'twere as good he were
O, Romeo, that she were, O that she were
O that she knew she were!
That warns my old age to a sepulchre.
The stony entrance of this sepulchre?
If thou art Dun, we'll draw thee from the mire
Ben. I pray thee, good Mercutio, let's retire.
Romeo. By love, that first did prompt me to enquire.
Is too much for a score
And Romeo dead; and Juliet, dead before,
Cap. But saying o'er what I have said before:
Romeo. Indeed I should have ask'd you that before.
Juliet. No, no. But all this did I know before.
Juliet. How cam'st thou hither, tell me, and wherefore?
Be heap'd like mine, and that thy skill be more
Mont. But I can give thee more;
To call hers (exquisite) in question more.
And that bare vowel 'I' shall poison more
It helps not, it prevails not. Talk no more.
This is my daughter's jointure, for no more
One more, most welcome, makes my number more.
Where, underneath the grove of sycamore
Such as I love; and you among the store,
That, when she dies, with beauty dies her store.
by too, and suffer every knave to use me at his pleasure!
Therefore thy earliness doth me assure
1. Mus. Then will I give you the serving-creature.
Thou art uprous'd with some distemp'rature;
Some misadventure.
Nurse. O, he is even in my mistress' case,
Just in her case!
To know our farther pleasure in this case,
Peter. Musicians, O, musicians, 'Heart's ease,' 'Heart's ease'!
O, an you will have me live, play 'Heart's ease.'
1. Mus. Why 'Heart's ease'',
Being the time the potion's force should cease.
Shall keep his native progress, but surcease;
For I am proverb'd with a grandsire phrase,
Mer. The pox of such antic, lisping, affecting fantasticoes- these
I would adventure for such merchandise.
Friar. Hark, how they knock! Who's there? Romeo, arise;
Thursday is near; lay hand on heart, advise:
Romeo. Bid her devise
But love thee better than thou canst devise
Do thou but call my resolution wise
Mer. He is wise,
A cold and drowsy humour; for no pulse
In thee at once; which thou at once wouldst lose.
But to himself so secret and so close,
Sometime she gallops o'er a courtier's nose,
goose, proves thee far and wide a broad goose.
have in my whole five. Was I with you there for the goose?
for the goose.
Romeo. And is it not, then, well serv'd in to a sweet goose?
What's in a name? That which we call a rose
Our bridal flowers serve for a buried corse;
Nurse. Weeping and wailing over Tybalt's corse.
A piteous corse, a bloody piteous corse;
that name, for fault of a worse.
Romeo. Nurse.
Juliet. Nurse?
Where is my father and my mother, nurse?
Lady Cap. Hold, take these keys and fetch more spices, nurse.
Some comfort, nurse.
Juliet. The clock struck nine when I did send the nurse;
Juliet. Ay, those attires are best; but, gentle nurse,
Romeo. What say'st thou, my dear nurse?
PETER, servant to Juliet's nurse.
Nurse. An honour? Were not I thine only nurse,
And may not wear them. O, here comes my nurse,
But he that hath the steerage of my course
And do not interrupt me in my course.
Nor aught so good but, strain'd from that fair use,
A precious ring- a ring that I must use
Ben. My noble uncle, do you know the cause?
Revolts from true birth, stumbling on abuse.
Romeo. What, shall this speech be spoke for our excuse?
Is longer than the tale thou dost excuse.
CAPULET'S house.
A hall in CAPULET'S house
CAPULET'S house.
A room in CAPULET'S house.
CAPULET'S house.
Suspecting that we both were in a house
As I remember, this should be the house.
Her mother is the lady of the house.
Romeo. Whose house?
Or shut me nightly in a charnel house,
Ser. To supper, to our house.
Hath sent a letter to his father's house.
This dagger hath mista'en, for, lo, his house
Shall bitterly begin his fearful date
O anything, of nothing first create!
Proud can I never be of what I hate,
It shall be Romeo, whom you know I hate,
Cank'red with peace, to part your cank'red hate.
Why then, O brawling love! O loving hate!
My life were better ended by their hate
See what a scourge is laid upon your hate,
Juliet. My only love, sprung from my only hate!
Supper is done, and we shall come too late.
Too early seen unknown, and known too late!
For hark you, Tybalt being slain so late,
Ah, sirrah, by my fay, it waxes late;
Afore me, It is so very very late
Thy beauty hath made me effeminate
Peter. Then will I lay the serving-creature's dagger on your pate.
Friar L. Go hence; good night; and here stands all your state:
To move the heavens to smile upon my state,
Friar L. Let me dispute with thee of thy estate.
Friar L. Benedicite!
Mer. Alas, poor Romeo, he is already dead! stabb'd with a white
The more I have, for both are infinite.
A villain, that is hither come in spite
For it was bad enough before their spite.
Where and what time thou wilt perform the rite;
To cross my obsequies and true love's rite?
And in the taste confounds the appetite.
What doth her beauty serve but as a note
I will carry no crotchets. I'll re you, I'll fa you. Do you note
Thy tears are womanish, thy wild acts denote
I'll go and chat with Paris. Hie, make haste,
Romeo. O, let us hence! I stand on sudden haste.
Therefore use none. Let Romeo hence in haste,
And I am nothing slow to slack his haste.
Will you be ready? Do you like this haste?
Now do you know the reason of this haste.
Ben. Then she hath sworn that she will still live chaste?
To season love, that of it doth not taste!
Romeo. She hath, and in that sparing makes huge waste;
How much salt water thrown away in waste,
Nurse. His name is Romeo, and a Montague,
Art thou not Romeo, and a Montague?
Tyb. This, by his voice, should be a Montague.
Thou art thyself, though not a Montague.
By thee, old Capulet, and Montague,
Lady Cap. He is a kinsman to the Montague;
Stop thy unhallowed toil, vile Montague!
For blood of ours shed blood of Montague.
Is empty on the back of Montague,
LADY MONTAGUE, wife to Montague.
ROMEO, son to Montague.
ABRAM, servant to Montague.
Paris. This is that banish'd haughty Montague
Or to dispraise my lord with that same tongue
Cap. And why, my Lady Wisdom? Hold your tongue,
This neighbour air, and let rich music's tongue
'Hold, friends! friends, part!' and swifter than his tongue,
Juliet. Blister'd be thy tongue
Romeo. And we mean well, in going to this masque;
Anon, good nurse! Sweet Montague, be true.
But trust me, gentleman, I'll prove more true
Romeo. In bed asleep, while they do dream things true.
Affection makes him false, he speaks not true.
Of my dear kinsman! Prince, as thou art true,
Is to himself- I will not say how true-
Did ever dragon keep so fair a cave?
Jul. I have.
And yet I wish but for the thing I have.
Hold, there is forty ducats. Let me have
To lay one in, another out to have.
Romeo. I can tell you; but young Romeo will be older when you have
Juliet. Not proud you have, but thankful that you have.
Fetch me my rapier, boy. [Exit boy.] What, dares the slave
Friar L. Not in a grave
To press before thy father to a grave?
To help to take her from her borrowed grave,
Or bid me go into a new-made grave
Taking the measure of an unmade grave.
I would the fool were married to her grave!
To follow this fair corse unto her grave.
Page. He came with flowers to strew his lady's grave;
I'll bury thee in a triumphant grave.
Why art thou yet so fair? Shall I believe
Mer. The slip, sir, the slip. Can you not conceive?
But to the earth some special good doth give;
I beg for justice, which thou, Prince, must give.
Where that same banish'd runagate doth live,
For naught so vile that on the earth doth live
An if thou couldst, thou couldst not make him live.
Romeo slew Tybalt; Romeo must not live.
What, rouse thee, man! Thy Juliet is alive,
Of this day's journey, and from nine till twelve
Therefore do nimble-pinion'd doves draw Love,
[Enter JULIET above.]
Juliet. A thousand times good night! [Exit JULIET above].
Stay but a little, I will come again. [Exit JULIET above.]
Cry but 'Ay me!' pronounce but 'love' and 'dove';
Lady Cap. Speak briefly, can you like of Paris' love?
Acquaint her here of my son Paris' love
Romeo. Would'st thou withdraw it? For what purpose, love?
Romeo. A right good markman! And she's fair I love.
O, I have bought the mansion of a love,
The fearful passage of their death-mark'd love,
My conceal'd lady to our cancell'd love?
Thy wit, that ornament to shape and love,
To turn your households' rancour to pure love.
Ben. Of love?
And therefore have I little talk'd of love;
Therefore have done. Some grief shows much of love;
Through lovers' brains, and then they dream of love;
Here's much to do with hate, but more with love.
Mer. If love be rough with you, be rough with love.
That heaven finds means to kill your joys with love!
Ben. In love?
Mer. And, to sink in it, should you burthen love-
Romeo. Out of her favour where I am in love.
Romeo. If my heart's dear love-
To fetch a ladder, by the which your love
The valiant Paris seeks you for his love.
To live an unstain'd wife to my sweet love.
My words would bandy her to my sweet love,
And not impute this yielding to light love,
But thankful even for hate that is meant love.
To answer 'I'll not wed, I cannot love;
One that you love.
Ben. Tell me in sadness, who is that you love?
Thou pout'st upon thy fortune and thy love.
Than death prorogued, wanting of thy love.
Wert thou as young as I, Juliet thy love,
Till thou shalt know the reason of my love;
Or, if thou wilt not, be but sworn my love,
It is my lady; O, it is my love!
Sweet, sweet, Sweet nurse, tell me, what says my love?
Romeo. And bad'st me bury love.
Juliet. I'll look to like, if looking liking move;
So stakes me to the ground I cannot move.
Which, but their children's end, naught could remove,
Unless good counsel may the cause remove.
Black and portentous must this humour prove
For this alliance may so happy prove
Romeo. I doubt it not; and all these woes shall serve
Who now the price of his dear blood doth owe?
Thou cut'st my head off with a golden axe
Juliet, on Thursday early will I rouse ye.
Go thither, and with unattainted eye
Romeo. Alack, there lies more peril in thine eye
Romeo. When the devout religion of mine eye
But no more deep will I endart mine eye
Non, ere the sun advance his burning eye
reason but because thou hast hazel eyes. What eye but such an eye
Hath not so green, so quick, so fair an eye
Herself pois'd with herself in either eye;
I'll say yon grey is not the morning's eye,
Care keeps his watch in every old man's eye,
Take thou some new infection to thy eye,
Mer. Men's eyes were made to look, and let them gaze.
In carrion flies than Romeo. They may seize
That you are now a maid. Thus then in brief:
That murd'red my love's cousin- with which grief
Who is already sick and pale with grief
Friar L. Ah, Juliet, I already know thy grief;
That sees into the bottom of my grief?
To cease thy suit and leave me to my grief.
Her blood is settled, and her joints are stiff;
And none but fools do wear it. Cast it off.
with the men, I will be cruel with the maids- I will cut off
And this distilled liquor drink thou off;
Or if thou wilt, swear by thy gracious self,
Being one too many by my weary self-
And private in his chamber pens himself,
Or in my cell there would she kill herself.
But, as it seems, did violence on herself.
In these confusions. Heaven and yourself
Lady Cap. Here comes your father. Tell him so yourself,
Henceforward do your messages yourself.
But purgatory, torture, hell itself.
Above the clouds, as high as heaven itself?
Friar L. Arise; one knocks. Good Romeo, hide thyself.
By doing damned hate upon thyself?
Thou hast the strength of will to slay thyself,
Hast thou slain Tybalt? Wilt thou slay thyself?
They are all forth; well, I will walk myself
Take all myself.
By heaven, I love thee better than myself,
My name, dear saint, is hateful to myself,
Upon so soft a subject as myself!
For I come hither arm'd against myself.
into a fool's paradise, as they say, it were a very gross kind of
Mer. Good Peter, to hide her face; for her fan's the fairer face of
Poor John. Draw thy tool - Here comes two of the house of
butcher of a silk button, a duellist, a duellist! a gentleman of
Juliet. It is an honour that I dream not of.
found him than he was when you sought him. I am the youngest of
dry-beat the rest of the eight. Will you pluck your sword out of
That Romeo should, upon receipt thereof,
Paris. Give me thy torch, boy. Hence, and stand aloof.
Whate'er thou hearest or seest, stand all aloof
Should be so tyrannous and rough in proof!
We'll have no Cupid hoodwink'd with a scarf,
Cap. How now, my headstrong? Where have you been gadding?
I have an interest in your hate's proceeding,
My blood for your rude brawls doth lie a-bleeding;
Out on her, hilding!
for sounding.
Ben. Nay, he will answer the letter's master, how he dares, being
For this night's watching.
Yet I should kill thee with much cherishing.
man! a very good whore!' Why, is not this a lamentable thing,
and they unwash'd too, 'tis a foul thing.
Too great oppression for a tender thing.
And little mouse, every unworthy thing,
O, much I fear some ill unthrifty thing.
Thou talk'st of nothing.
Is he gone and hath nothing?
Romeo is banish'd; and all the world to nothing
At the prefixed hour of her waking
ill thing to be off'red to any gentlewoman, and very weak dealing.
Romeo. Give me a torch. I am not for this ambling.
tutor me from quarrelling!
What say you, Simon Catling?
Stay not to question, for the Watch is coming.
Romeo is coming.
Hold, take this letter. Early in the morning
Shall I be married then to-morrow morning?
I'll have this knot knit up to-morrow morning.
Ben. Tut, man, one fire burns out another's burning;
Turn giddy, and be holp by backward turning;
Could to no issue of true honour bring.
Blubb'ring and weeping, weeping and blubbering.
But love from love, towards school with heavy looks. [Retiring.]
Back, foolish tears, back to your native spring!
For now, these hot days, is the mad blood stirring.
courageous captain of compliments. He fights as you sing
Tyb. Patience perforce with wilful choler meeting
Makes my flesh tremble in their different greeting.
Mer. Could you not take some occasion without giving
She's not well married that lives married long,
Romeo. Ay me! sad hours seem long.
For then I hope thou wilt not keep him long
And pity 'tis you liv'd at odds so long.
Under yond yew tree lay thee all along,
Ben. Soft! I will go along.
An if you leave me so, you do me wrong.
And in his needy shop a tortoise hung,
But she's best married that dies married young.
'a? Gentlemen, can any of you tell me where I may find the young
Romeo. Is the day so young?
Where Juliet lives; and every cat and dog
To see it tetchy and fall out with the dug!
For I had then laid wormwood to my dug,
Mont. Who set this ancient quarrel new abroach?
And yours, close fighting ere I did approach.
As signal that thou hear'st something approach.
The boy gives warning something doth approach.
Go, some of you; whoe'er you find attach.
The world affords no law to make thee rich;
Ser. Now I'll tell you without asking. My master is the great rich
but not to the purpose. Signior Romeo, bon jour! There's a French
But, like a misbhav'd and sullen wench,
Mer. O, here's a wit of cheveril, that stretches from an inch
Raise up the Montagues. Some others search.
To go with Paris to Saint Peter's Church,
The County Paris, at Saint Peter's Church,
Friar L. Come, is the bride ready to go to church?
In all her best array bear her to church;
Page. O Lord, they fight! I will go call the Watch.
And then I ran away to call the Watch.
Romeo. Swits and spurs, swits and spurs! or I'll cry a match.
I think you are happy in this second match,
And learn me how to lose a winning match,
Where is the County's page that rais'd the watch?
That Romeo bid thee fetch?
Cap. Hang thee, young baggage! disobedient wretch!
Romeo. Courage, man. The hurt cannot be much.
Being our kinsman, if we revel much.
Juliet. Good pilgrim, you do wrong your hand too much,
But now I see this one is one too much,
Juliet. As much to him, else is his thanks too much.
Cap. What, man? 'Tis not so much, 'tis not so much!
Juliet. Well, thou hast comforted me marvellous much.
For saints have hands that pilgrims' hands do touch,
By her fine foot, straight leg, and quivering thigh,
Appear thou in the likeness of a sigh;
Dost thou not laugh?
Nurse. Yes, madam. Yet I cannot choose but laugh
Lady Cap. No, not till Thursday. There is time enough.
Mer. Ay, ay, a scratch, a scratch. Marry, 'tis enough.
Romeo. Is love a tender thing? It is too rough,
am a pretty piece of flesh.
Farewell. Buy food and get thyself in flesh.
In mortal paradise of such sweet flesh?
Killing that love which thou hast vow'd to cherish;
One pain is lessoned by another's anguish;
One desperate grief cures with another's languish.
An I might live to see thee married once, I have my wish.
Stand not amaz'd. The Prince will doom thee death
Shall, stiff and stark and cold, appear like death;
Romeo. Thou detestable maw, thou womb of death,
Why I descend into this bed of death
How oft when men are at the point of death
A dateless bargain to engrossing death!
And fearfully did menace me with death
And in this borrowed likeness of shrunk death
Your part in her you could not keep from death,
Can vengeance be pursu'd further than death?
O love! O life! not life, but love in death!
Romeo. Let me be ta'en, let me be put to death.
Their course of love, the tidings of her death;
Lady Cap. Evermore weeping for your cousin's death?
Would none but I might venge my cousin's death!
Bal. I brought my master news of Juliet's death;
Hath slain ten thousand Tybalts. Tybalt's death
But with a rearward following Tybalt's death,
Some word there was, worser than Tybalt's death,
Paris. Immoderately she weeps for Tybalt's death,
Lady Cap. Well, girl, thou weep'st not so much for his death
And sayest thou yet that exile is not death?
Turn thee Benvolio! look upon thy death.
Was Tybalt's doomsday, whose untimely death
By some vile forfeit of untimely death.
Romeo. Ha, banishment? Be merciful, say 'death';
And that the trunk may be discharg'd of breath
Friar L. I will be brief, for my short date of breath
Do you not see that I am out of breath?
To say to me that thou art out of breath?
This bud of love, by summer's ripening breath,
Grief of my son's exile hath stopp'd her breath.
Juliet. How art thou out of breath when thou hast breath
Death, that hath suck'd the honey of thy breath,
To blazon it, then sweeten with thy breath
here writ, and can never find what names the writing person hath
Tybalt, Mercutio, the Prince expressly hath
Bearing a Tartar's painted bow of lath,
Nurse. I'll lay fourteen of my teeth-
And drink it off, and if you had the strength
in the versal world. Doth not rosemary and Romeo begin both with
with his last, the fisher with his pencil and the painter with
fingers. Therefore he that cannot lick his fingers goes not with
Feather of lead, bright smoke, cold fire, sick health!
Or if he do, it needs must be by stealth.
cannot sum up sum of half my wealth.
speak more in a minute than he will stand to in a month.
Or ill-beseeming beast in seeming both!
Misshapen in the conduct of them both,
Nurse. And from my soul too; else beshrew them both.
Turn to another, this shall slay them both.
Thy father, or thy mother, nay, or both,
Friar L. Romeo shall thank thee, daughter, for us both.
Unfold the imagin'd happiness that both
Paris. Of honourable reckoning are you both,
Then, since the case so stands as now it doth,
Nurse. Ay, forsooth.
Nurse. By my troth, it is well said. 'For himself to mar,' quoth
Why railest thou on thy birth, the heaven, and earth?
Gorg'd with the dearest morsel of the earth,
And shrieks like mandrakes torn out of the earth,
Which too untimely here did scorn the earth.
Sole monarch of the universal earth.
Where bloody Tybalt, yet but green in earth,
How shall that faith return again to earth
She is the hopeful lady of my earth.
Even now the frozen bosom of the North
She wakes; and I entreated her come forth
Seal'd up the doors, and would not let us forth,
They are but beggars that can count their worth;
Turning his face to the dew-dropping South.
Let them affright thee. I beseech thee, youth,
To be a virtuous and well-govern'd youth.
A grave? O, no, a lanthorn, slaught'red youth,
Juliet. That is no slander, sir, which is a truth;
Nay, come, I pray thee speak. Good, good nurse, speak.
Friar L. Thou fond mad man, hear me a little speak.
Ties up my tongue and will not let me speak.
Nurse. May not one speak?
I have forgot why I did call thee back.
Beg pardon of the Prince, and call thee back
But send him back.
Whiter than new snow upon a raven's back.
Contempt and beggary hangs upon thy back:
A pack of blessings light upon thy back;
My back o' t' other side,- ah, my back, my back!
Thou sober-suited matron, all in black,
Doth my name lodge? Tell me, that I may sack
Pet. Pretty! What say You, Hugh Rebeck?
Sometimes she driveth o'er a soldier's neck,
Ser. You shall have none ill, sir; for I'll try if they can lick
Here in this city visiting the sick,
All night for lesser cause, and ne'er been sick.
The curfew bell hath rung, 'tis three o'clock.
Ben. Two, two! a shirt and a smock.
What simpleness is this.- I come, I come! [Knock.]
Thou wilt be taken.- Stay awhile!- Stand up; [Knock.]
[Knock.]
[Knock.]
Enter ROMEO, and BALTHASAR with a torch, a mattock
That I might touch that cheek!
Else would a maiden blush bepaint my cheek
Delay this marriage for a month, a week;
Tybalt, you ratcatcher, will you walk?
In penalty alike; and 'tis not hard, I think,
Did not attend him as we rode? I think
(Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!)
Romeo. O, teach me how I should forget to think!
Romeo, that spoke him fair, bid him bethink
Under love's heavy burthen do I sink.
Friar L. There on the ground, with his own tears made drunk.
Juliet. You kiss by th' book.
One writ with me in sour misfortune's book!
First Ser. Away with the join-stools, remove the court-cubbert, look
For exile hath more terror in his look,
Nurse. See where she comes from shrift with merry look.
Juliet. Then have my lips the sin that they have took.
The dashing rocks thy seasick weary bark!
Blind is his love and best befits the dark.
Must climb a bird's nest soon when it is dark.
It was the nightingale, and not the lark,
Mer. If love be blind, love cannot hit the mark.
Friar L. Come, come with me, and we will make short work;
Or walk in thievish ways, or bid me lurk
Mer. Why, may one ask?
Like powder in a skilless soldier's flask,
Were in a mask?
Beautiful tyrant! fiend angelical!
Of one I danc'd withal.
How nice the quarrel was, and urg'd withal
I nurs'd her daughter that you talk'd withal.
Of a poor pothecary, and therewithal
Too flattering-sweet to be substantial.
Come, vial.
Turn from their office to black funeral-
Cap. All things that we ordained festival
As is the night before some festival
Such comfort as do lusty young men feel
Romeo. Thou canst not speak of that thou dost not feel.
When well apparell'd April on the heel
Profaners of this neighbour-stained steel-
And in my temper soft'ned valour's steel
Rom. I warrant thee my man's as true as steel.
minstrel.
I have rememb'red me, thou's hear our counsel.
So stumblest on my counsel?
Mer. A sail, a sail!
And sometime comes she with a tithe-pig's tail
Cap. Death, that hath ta'en her hence to make me wail,
villain, that fights by the book of arithmetic! Why the devil
are past compare. He is not the flower of courtesy, but, I'll
Be brisk awhile, and the longer liver take all.
Nurse. Ah sir! ah sir! Well, death's the end of all.
Had part in this fair maid! now heaven hath all,
For I am sure you have your hands full all
Which, like a usurer, abound'st in all,
Ben. O noble Prince. I can discover all
What if this mixture do not work at all?
Juliet. Do not swear at all;
Yet tell me not, for I have heard it all.
Ah ha, my mistresses! which of you all
Is it e'en so? Why then, I thank you all.
She would be as swift in motion as a ball;
Have they been merry! which their keepers call
To paly ashes, thy eyes' windows fall
Now seeming sweet, convert to bitt'rest gall.
I will withdraw; but this intrusion shall,
Romeo. Go to! I say you shall.
new tuners of accent! 'By Jesu, a very good blade! a very tall
Ben. He ran this way, and leapt this orchard wall.
from the wall and thrust his maids to the wall.
Sitting in the sun under the dovehouse wall.
Romeo. And stay, good nurse, behind the abbey wall.
wall.
[He leaps the orchad-wall.]
thou loves me, let the porter let in Susan Grindstone and Nell.
Lady Cap. O me! this sight of death is as a bell
FRIAR LAURENCE'S  cell.
Having displeas'd my father, to Laurence' cell,
Nurse. Then hie you hence to Friar Laurence' cell;
And there she shall at Friar Laurence' cell
I'll to him; he is hid at Laurence' cell.
Juliet. I met the youthful lord at Laurence' cell
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
Verona. FRIAR LAURENCE'S cell.
Friar LAURENCE'S cell.
Go; I'll to dinner; hie you to the cell.
Hence will I to my ghostly father's cell,
Look, sir, here comes the lady toward my cell.
Unto my cell.
Meaning to keep her closely at my cell
This torture should be roar'd in dismal hell.
O friar, the damned use that word in hell;
O nature, what hadst thou to do in hell
Thy love did read by rote, that could not spell.
Than these poor compounds that thou mayst not sell.
That I have worn a visor and could tell
His help to crave and my dear hap to tell.
For nothing can be ill if she be well.
How doth my lady? Is my father well?
Ah, sirrah, this unlook'd-for sport comes well.
That you run mad, seeing that she is well.
That shall she, marry; I remember it well.
Juliet. Madam, I am not well.
Juliet. I' faith, I am sorry that thou art not well.
Juliet. I come, anon.- But if thou meanest not well,
Bal. Here's one, a friend, and one that knows you well.
Friar L. O, she knew well
Nurse. You say well.
So fairly bound? O, that deceit should dwell
Farewell.
Romeo. Farewell!
Mer. Farewell, ancient lady. Farewell,
Juiet. Hie to high fortune! Honest nurse, farewell.
And bid him come to take his last farewell.
Bal. Then she is well, and nothing can be ill.
The heavens do low'r upon you for some ill;
O, in this love, you love your child so ill
Ah, word ill urg'd to one that is so ill!
Now is the sun upon the highmost hill
Mercy but murders, pardoning those that kill.
Romeo. Alas that love, whose view is muffled still,
Two such opposed kings encamp them still
my young lady bid me enquire you out. What she bid me say, I will
Romeo. A gentleman, nurse, that loves to hear himself talk and will
In man as well as herbs- grace and rude will;
Move them no more by crossing their high will.
Bear hence this body, and attend our will.
Who knocks so hard? Whence come you? What's your will?
What is your will?
Run to my study.- By-and-by!- God's will,
Romeo. Bid a sick man in sadness make his will.
Should without eyes see pathways to his will!
Come Pentecost as quickly as it will,
Apoth. Put this in any liquid thing you will
But, let them measure us by what they will,
Romeo. I pay thy poverty and not thy will.
Peter. O, musicians, because my heart itself plays 'My heart is full
Cap. Peace, you mumbling fool!
And then to have a wretched puling fool,
Romeo. O, I am fortune's fool!
Of my dug and felt it bitter, pretty fool,
She shall be married to this noble earl.
But now I'll tell thee joyful tidings, girl.
Paris. O, I am slain! If thou be merciful,
What said my man when my betossed soul
Juliet. O God, I have an ill-divining soul!
That late thou gavest me; for Mercutio's soul
And then my husband (God be with his soul!
You'll not endure him? God shall mend my soul!
Romeo. So thrive my soul-
And if we meet, we shall not scape a brawl,
The unlucky manage of this fatal brawl.
Utter your gravity o'er a gossip's bowl,
I know not how to tell thee who I am.
Nurse. Madam!
Nurse. [within] Madam!
Nurse. [within] Madam!
Romeo's a dishclout to him. An eagle, madam,
I needs must wake her. Madam, madam, madam!
Juliet. What villain, madam?
I pray you tell my lord and father, madam,
Wilt thou not, Jule?' and, by my holidam,
Being in night, all this is but a dream,
O'er ladies' lips, who straight on kisses dream,
Shall give him such an unaccustom'd dram
Here in Verona, ladies of esteem,
Who, raging with thy tears and they with them,
Haply some poison yet doth hang on them
Tyb. Follow me close, for I will speak to them.
Is death to any he that utters them.
As that the villain lives which slaughter'd him.
Upon his body that hath slaughter'd him.
To the dead bodies. I will apprehend him.
I'll not endure him.
The ape is dead, and I must conjure him.
Juliet. I will confess to you that I love him.
As living here and you no use of him.
Therefore be patient, take no note of him.
Mont. I neither know it nor can learn of him
And, to say truth, Verona brags of him
Friar L. Sir, go you in; and, madam, go with him;
Either thou or I, or both, must go with him.
If thou art fickle, what dost thou with him
We took this mattock and this spade from him
Of mortals that fall back to gaze on him
And by and by my master drew on him,
All our whole city is much bound to him.
To hear him nam'd and cannot come to him,
I conjure only but to raise up him.
Mer. This cannot anger him. 'Twould anger him
Ben. An if he hear thee, thou wilt anger him.
To make me die with a restorative. [She kisses him.]
O, what a beast was I to chide at him!
Here lives a caitiff wretch would sell it him.'
And that my master slew him.
Flower as she was, deflowered by him.
Young Adam Cupid, he that shot so trim
Her whip, of cricket's bone; the lash, of film;
Then, dreadful trumpet, sound the general doom!
I bring thee tidings of the Prince's doom.
Romeo. Father, what news? What is the Prince's doom
Romeo. What less than doomsday is the Prince's doom?
Displant a town, reverse a prince's doom,
So worthy a gentleman to be her bridegroom?
And it missheathed in my daughter's bosom.
And 'twixt them rushes; underneath whose arm
came you between us? I was hurt under your arm.
Thy lips are warm!
With this night's revels and expire the term
Not half so big as a round little worm
As is the bud bit with an envious worm
Ben. Strike, drum.
therefore, if you should deal double with her, truly it were an
Nurse. Romeo can,
Romeo. Amen, amen! But come what sorrow can,
FRIAR LAURENCE, a Franciscan.
Where civil blood makes civil hands unclean.
And with wild looks bid me devise some mean
No sudden mean of death, though ne'er so mean,
Speak, nephew, were you by when it began?
choose a man. Romeo? No, not he. Though his face be better than
Stand up, stand up! Stand, an you be a man.
Digressing from the valour of a man;
Nurse. A man, young lady! lady, such a man
Lady Cap. Find thou the means, and I'll find such a man.
Proportion'd as one's thought would wish a man-
addle as an egg for quarrelling. Thou hast quarrell'd with a man
one would kill the other. Thou! why, thou wilt quarrel with a man
Madam, if you could find out but a man
You will set cock-a-hoop! you'll be the man!
Good gentle youth, tempt not a desp'rate man.
Unseemly woman in a seeming man!
Friar L. Romeo, come forth; come forth, thou fearful man.
Your worship in that sense may call him man.
Sojourn in Mantua. I'll find out your man,
1. Watchman. Here is a friar, and slaughter'd Romeo's man,
Ben. Not to his father's. I spoke with his man.
For he hath still been tried a holy man.
Prince. We still have known thee for a holy man.
Tyb. Well, peace be with you, sir. Here comes my man.
Juliet. Come hither, nurse. What is yond gentleman?
Lady Cap. What say you? Can you love the gentleman?
The gallant, young, and noble gentleman,
O courteous Tybalt! honest gentleman
'Your love says, like an honest gentleman,
O, he's a lovely gentleman!
'A bears him like a portly gentleman,
[Exit  Servingman.]
Cap. Make haste, make haste. [Exit 1 Servingman.]
Thou shalt be loggerhead! [Exit 2 Servingman.]
Cap. Go, begone. [Exit Servingman.]
In sadness, cousin, I do love a woman.
Lord, she will be a joyful woman.
Mer. God ye good-den, fair gentlewoman.
On the forefinger of an alderman,
Anthony, and Potpan!
Cap. O, God-i-god-en!
Enter MERCUTIO, BENVOLIO and Men.
Nurse. Is it good-den?
It is too rash, too unadvis'd, too sudden;
Waking or sleeping, still my care hath been
Greg. 'Tis well thou art not fish; if thou hadst, thou hadst been
Could not take truce with the unruly spleen
Her vestal livery is but sick and green,
Yet put it out, for I would not be seen.
Mont. Many a morning hath he there been seen,
Leap to these arms untalk'd of and unseen.
Come Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen.
On Lammas Eve at night shall she be fourteen;
Lady Cap. She's not fourteen.
All this is comfort; wherefore weep I then?
And art thou chang'd? Pronounce this sentence then:
Friar L. Welcome then.
Juliet. I will not fail. 'Tis twenty years till then.
Friar L. That's my good son! But where hast thou been then?
Cap. Well, get you gone. A Thursday be it then.
Pet. You will not then?
wit, and put up my iron dagger. Answer me like men.
To enter in the thoughts of desperate men!
Ben. We talk here in the public haunt of men.
Women may fall when there's no strength in men.
Greg. The quarrel is between our masters and us their men.
ever thrust to the wall. Therefore I will push Montague's men
Nurse. No less? Nay, bigger! Women grow by men
Juliet. Amen!
Nurse. God ye good morrow, gentlemen.
Direct my sail! On, lusty gentlemen!
Enter CAPULET, LADY CAPULET, NURSE, and two or three Servingmen.
Enter [PARIS'S] PAGE and Watchmen.
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
[Exeunt some Watchmen.]
master's kinsmen.
And find delight writ there with beauty's pen;
Thus I enforce thy rotten jaws to open,
With instruments upon them fit to open
Ser. Find them out whose names are written here? It is written
Two of the fairest stars in all the heaven,
As is a winged messenger of heaven
Unless that husband send it me from heaven
My husband is on earth, my faith in heaven.
As daylight doth a lamp; her eyes in heaven
Where the infectious pestilence did reign,
Doth couch his limbs, there golden sleep doth reign.
But he which bore my letter, Friar John,
Friar L. This same should be the voice of Friar John.
But one thing to rejoice and solace in,
Give me a case to put my visage in.
great natural that runs lolling up and down to hide his bauble in
when 'twas a little prating thing - O, there is a nobleman in
Tybalt under Romeo's arm thrusts Mercutio in.
Ben. Come, knock and enter; and no sooner in
To whose foul mouth no healthsome air breathes in,
Mer. Come, come, thou art as hot a jack in thy mood as any in
That murd'red me. I would forget it fain;
Juliet. But to be frank and give it thee again.
Romeo. I'll tell thee ere thou ask it me again.
And yet I would it were to give again.
[Enter JULIET above again].
Now, Tybalt, take the 'villain' back again
To lure this tassel-gentle back again!
We must talk in secret. Nurse, come back again;
And with a silk thread plucks it back again,
Ben. Here comes the furious Tybalt back again.
How fares my Juliet? That I ask again,
What, dress'd, and in your clothes, and down again?
Now Romeo is belov'd, and loves again,
Friar J. I could not send it- here it is again-
And then down falls again.
If ever you disturb our streets again,
Juliet. Farewell! God knows when we shall meet again.
Juliet. O, think'st thou we shall ever meet again?
No better term than this: thou art a villain.
A damned saint, an honourable villain!
But to his foe suppos'd he must complain,
Paris. Beguil'd, divorced, wronged, spited, slain!
My husband lives, that Tybalt would have slain;
Romeo. Alive in triumph, and Mercutio slain?
1. Watchman. Sovereign, here lies the County Paris slain;
The citizens are up, and Tybalt slain.
Could draw to part them, was stout Tybalt slain;
Pitiful sight! here lies the County slain;
Depart again. Here, here will I remain
But where unbruised youth with unstuff'd brain
Which are the children of an idle brain,
Ben. Go then, for 'tis in vain
Thou and my bosom henceforth shall be twain.
Than with that hand that cut thy youth in twain
Samp. Let us take the law of our sides; let them begin.
Romeo. For your broken shin.
Juliet. Where is my mother? Why, she is within.
[NURSE calls within.]
Now, by the stock and honour of my kin,
To strike him dead I hold it not a sin.
Juliet. Where I have learnt me to repent the sin
Which, well thou knowest, is cross and full of sin.
Still blush, as thinking their own kisses sin;
O cousin, cousin!
Ben. Good morrow, cousin.
Nurse. Will you speak well of him that kill'd your cousin?
To wreak the love I bore my cousin
But wherefore, villain, didst thou kill my cousin?
I'll be a candle-holder and look on;
Thou desperate pilot, now at once run on
Where is my page? Go, villain, fetch a surgeon.
Bring forth the parties of suspicion.
occasion.
Some say the lark makes sweet division;
Lady Cap. We shall be short in our provision.
The hateful mansion.
Romeo. Why, such is love's transgression.
Ben. At thy good heart's oppression.
Mer. O calm, dishonourable, vile submission!
That were some spite; my invocation
Paris. I do defy thy, conjuration
Than thou went'st forth in lamentation.
So fearful were they of infection.
Of disobedient opposition
Romeo. A most courteous exposition.
The most you sought was her promotion,
Paris. God shield I should disturb devotion!
Which craves as desperate an execution
Peter. Anon.
Peter. Anon.
Nurse. Anon, anon!
Of healths five fadom deep; and then anon
Arise, fair sun, and kill the envious moon,
Juliet. O, swear not by the moon, th' inconstant moon,
upon the prick of noon.
Some means to come to shrift this afternoon;
And, Montague, come you this afternoon,
Cap. Monday! ha, ha! Well, Wednesday is too soon.
should quickly have been out, I warrant you. I dare draw as soon
Peter. I saw no man use you at his pleasure. If I had, my weapon
and a crow of iron.
Romeo. Give me that mattock and the wrenching iron.
Peter. Then have at you with my wit! I will dry-beat you with an iron
So early walking did I see your son.
But for the sunset of my brother's son
Away from light steals home my heavy son
Nurse. I speak no treason.
And here he writes that he did buy a poison
Or if thou thinkest I am too quickly won,
To grubs and eyeless skulls? As I discern,
O weraday that ever I was born!
Who, nothing hurt withal, hiss'd him in scorn.
Too rude, too boist'rous, and it pricks like thorn.
Romeo. It was the lark, the herald of the morn;
Lady Cap. Marry, my child, early next Thursday morn
Trust to't. Bethink you. I'll not be forsworn.
Is it more sin to wish me thus forsworn,
Page. This is the place. There, where the torch doth burn.
In half an hour she 'promis'd to return.
Cap. Ready to go, but never to return.
To twinkle in their spheres till they return.
Shot from the deadly level of a gun,
Ne'er saw her match since first the world begun.
Greg. How? turn thy back and run?
Some 'Juliet,' and some 'Paris'; and all run,
When presently through all thy veins shall run
Ben. Madam, an hour before the worshipp'd sun
Or dedicate his beauty to the sun.
It is the East, and Juliet is the sun!
One fairer than my love? The all-seeing sun
But all so soon as the all-cheering sun
And pay no worship to the garish sun.
Doth add more grief to too much of mine own.
Juliet. It may be so, for it is not mine own.
With blood remov'd but little from her own?
Ser. Marry, sir, 'tis an ill cook that cannot lick his own
But to rejoice in splendour of my own.
I- measuring his affections by my own,
To catch my death with jauncing up and down!
Prick love for pricking, and you beat love down.
Nurse. Ay, ay, the cords. [Throws them down.]
Citizens. Clubs, bills, and partisans! Strike! beat them down!
[He goes down.]
[She kneels down.]
[She kneels down.]
Till she had laid it and conjur'd it down.
To see thy son and heir more early down.
Romeo. I'll go along, no such sight to be shown,
With more of thine. This love that thou hast shown
That whiles Verona by that name is known,
By cruel cruel thee quite overthrown!
And finding him, the searchers of the town,
I would not for the wealth of all this town
1. Mus. No.
Romeo. With Rosaline, my ghostly father? No.
Greg. [aside to SAMSON] No.
Leave me and do the thing I bid thee do.
In what I farther shall intend to do,
Romeo. O, then, dear saint, let lips do what hands do!
Put up your swords. You know not what you do.
Mer. Come, sir, your passado!
Ben. Romeo! my cousin Romeo! Romeo!
Though heaven cannot. O Romeo, Romeo!
Friar L. Romeo!
Bal. Romeo.
Juliet. Romeo!
Who ever would have thought it? Romeo!
That runaway eyes may wink, and Romeo
Nurse. Hie to your chamber. I'll find Romeo
Henceforth I never will be Romeo.
They say Jove laughs. O gentle Romeo,
There lies the man, slain by young Romeo,
Romeo?
Tyb. Mercutio, thou consortest with Romeo.
Lady Cap. That same villain Romeo.
Tyb. 'Tis he, that villain Romeo.
Friar L. Who bare my letter, then, to Romeo?
BENVOLIO, nephew to Montague, and friend to Romeo
MERCUTIO, kinsman to the Prince and friend to Romeo.
Till I conveniently could send to Romeo.
Shame come to Romeo!
Because he married me before to Romeo?
But by-and-by comes back to Romeo,
The form of death. Meantime I writ to Romeo
BALTHASAR, servant to Romeo.
Than this of Juliet and her Romeo.
Where is my lady's lord, where's Romeo?
Enter JULIET somewhat fast and embraces Romeo.
Ben. Here comes Romeo! here comes Romeo!
Welcome from Mantua. What says Romeo?
Juliet. Here's such a coil! Come, what says Romeo?
I wake before the time that Romeo
She will beshrew me much that Romeo
Juliet. O Romeo, Romeo! wherefore art thou Romeo?
Ere I again behold my Romeo!
And there I am. Where is my Romeo?
Lady Cap. The people in the street cry 'Romeo,'
Romeo!
Give me those flowers. Do as I bid thee, go.
Nurse. Go, you cot-quean, go,
Good Prudence. Smatter with your gossips, go!
Well said, my hearts!- You are a princox- go!
Mont. Thou villain Capulet!- Hold me not, let me go.
Come, shall we go?
I have more care to stay than will to go.
But 'tis no wit to go.
I would have been abed an hour ago.
His son was but a ward two years ago.
Cap. What noise is this? Give me my long sword, ho!
Farewell, My lord.- Light to my chamber, ho!
Friar J. Holy Franciscan Friar, Brother, ho!
I'll play the housewife for this once. What, ho!
Up to the ears. Come, we burn daylight, ho!
Mer. A bawd, a bawd, a bawd! So ho!
But sadly tell me who.
Nurse. Marry, that, I think, be young Petruchio.
Mer. Help me into some house, Benvolio,
Nurse. The son and heir of old Tiberio.
'Tis since the nuptial of Lucentio,
Citizen. Which way ran he that kill'd Mercutio?
Hold, Tybalt! Good Mercutio!
Call, good Mercutio.
That slew thy kinsman, brave Mercutio.
Prince. Romeo slew him; he slew Mercutio.
The lady widow of Vitruvio;
I bear no hatred, blessed man, for, lo,
Ben. Groan? Why, no;
If be be slain, say 'I'; or if not, 'no.'
Mer. Nay, I'll conjure too.
1. Watchman. A great suspicion! Stay the friar too.
Juliet. Now by Saint Peter's Church, and Peter too,
And I, for winking at you, discords too,
O, now I would they had chang'd voices too,
Romeo! O, pale! Who else? What, Paris too?
Romeo. Have not saints lips, and holy palmers too?
But thou slewest Tybalt. There art thou happy too.
Paris. These times of woe afford no tune to woo.
Ere he that should be husband comes to woo.
flies, these fashion-mongers, these pardona-mi's, who stand so
Juliet. O, shut the door! and when thou hast done so,
Therefore love moderately: long love doth so;
Cap. How canst thou try them so?
You are to blame, my lord, to rate her so.
Helen and Hero hildings and harlots, This be a gray eye or so,
Paris. My father Capulet will have it so,
I am content, so thou wilt have it so.
Said he not so? or did I dream it so?
Come, death, and welcome! Juliet wills it so.
The other did not so.
Perchance she cannot meet him. That's not so.
Romeo. Nay, that's not so.
Cap. Why, how now, kinsman? Wherefore storm you so?
What, goodman boy? I say he shall. Go to!
Am I the master here, or you? Go to!
Cap. Go to, go to!
Ben. And what to?
Nurse. Well, you have made a simple choice; you know not how to
Which heavy sorrow makes them apt unto.
the two.
We'll keep no great ado- a friend or two;
And being thus frighted, swears a prayer or two
Ser. Up.
The obsequies that I for thee will keep
Romeo. If I may trust the flattering truth of sleep
Of death, contagion, and unnatural sleep.
This field-bed is too cold for me to sleep.
And then awake as from a pleasant sleep.
Marry, and amen. How sound is she asleep!
Athwart men's noses as they lie asleep;
Tickling a parson's nose as 'a lies asleep,
Nightly shall be to strew, thy grave and weep.
Ben. No, coz, I rather weep.
Or, if sour woe delights in fellowship
What are they, I beseech your ladyship?
By her high forehead and her scarlet lip,
Help, help! Call help.
If in thy wisdom thou canst give no help,
Come weep with me- past hope, past cure, past help!
Lady Cap. What, are you busy, ho? Need you my help?
O churl! drunk all, and left no friendly drop
Cap. Why, I am glad on't. This is well. Stand up.
To County Paris, to prepare him up
Go waken Juliet; go and trim her up.
Romeo. Gentle Mercutio, put thy rapier up.
More light, you knaves! and turn the tables up,
And now falls on her bed, and then starts up,
Nurse. Honest good fellows, ah, put up, put up!
Lady Cap. Ho, daughter! are you up?
Prince. What misadventure is so early up,
Prince. Come, Montague; for thou art early up
Juliet. Ay, pilgrim, lips that they must use in pray'r.
That pierc'd the fearful hollow of thine ear.
Like a rich jewel in an Ethiop's ear-
A whispering tale in a fair lady's ear,
[They whisper in his ear.]
That presses them and learns them first to bear,
And lead you even to death. Meantime forbear,
Beauty too rich for use, for earth too dear!
Is Rosaline, that thou didst love so dear,
Romeo. My dear?
Nurse. O God's Lady dear!
Juliet. Give me, give me! O, tell not me of fear!
If no inconstant toy nor womanish fear
A dram of poison, such soon-speeding gear
Romeo. Here's goodly gear!
For so he said he would. I hear him near.
An open et cetera, thou a pop'rin pear!
I will not marry yet; and when I do, I swear
Romeo. Lady, by yonder blessed moon I swear,
To breathe such vows as lovers use to swear,
Nurse. Even or odd, of all days in the year,
More fierce and more inexorable far
I am no pilot; yet, wert thou as far
Friar L. Too familiar
What if it be a poison which the friar
Hast thou no letters to me from the friar?
Dost thou not bring me letters from the friar?
Nurse. O holy friar, O, tell me, holy friar
Now, afore God, this reverend holy friar,
Greg. Ay, while you live, draw your neck out of collar.
remain, after the wearing, solely singular.
Romeo. One, gentlewoman, that God hath made for himself to mar.
An old hare hoar,
And an old hare hoar,
But a hare that is hoar
News from Verona! How now, Balthasar?
JULIET'S chamber.
JULIET'S chamber.
Nurse. Your lady mother is coming to your chamber.
for, in the great chamber.
Let not the nurse lie with thee in thy chamber.
And so good Capulet, which name I tender
Cap. Sir Paris, I will make a desperate tender
A whining mammet, in her fortune's tender,
Juliet. [aside] Villain and he be many miles asunder.
FRIAR JOHN, of the same order.
Thou hast amaz'd me. By my holy order,
And in their triumph die, like fire and powder,
it, is a gentlemanlike offer.
[Snatching ROMEO'S dagger.]
Juliet. Yea, noise? Then I'll be brief. O happy dagger!
soul, had as lieve see a toad, a very toad, as see him. I anger
But chiefly to take thence from her dead finger
the argument no longer.
keep to myself; but first let me tell ye, if ye should lead her
I tell you, he that can lay hold of her
Ben. Be rul'd by me: forget to think of her.
And that we have a curse in having her.
Romeo. Spakest thou of Juliet? How is it with her?
Thursday let it be, a Thursday, tell her
You, to remove that siege of grief from her,
Cap. Well, be may chance to do some good on her.
Live here in heaven and may look on her;
As I intended, for it wrought on her
Go thou to Juliet, help to deck up her.
Thus from my lips, by thine my sin is purg'd. [He Kisses her.]
Give me my sin again. [He Kisses her.]
Nurse. God in heaven bless her!
Ascend her chamber, hence and comfort her.
He shift a trencher! he scrape a trencher!
Romeo. Good morrow, father.
See thou deliver it to my lord and father.
Farewell, dear father.
This letter he early bid me give his father,
Paris. Come you to make confession to this father?
Romeo. I must indeed; and therefore came I hither.
1. Watchman. Hold him in safety till the Prince come hither.
Ay, marry, go, I say, and fetch him hither.
What unaccustom'd cause procures her hither?
Romeo. Whither?
Or I will drag thee on a hurdle thither.
Romeo, will you come to your father's? We'll to dinner thither.
Will you go to them? I will bring you thither.
Thou wilt quarrel with a man for cracking nuts, having no other
Romeo. What is her mother?
Nurse. Your mother.
"Where is your mother?"'
your mother?
Juliet. Who is't that calls? It is my lady mother.
tailor for wearing his new doublet before Easter, with another
Doth make against me, of this direful murther;
In thy best robes uncovered on the bier
And thou and Romeo press one heavy bier!
A lover may bestride the gossamer
mourners, and stay dinner.
Towards Phoebus' lodging! Such a wagoner
Come, go with me. [To the SERVANT, giving back a paper]
Thou knowest my lodging. Get me ink and paper
[Giving back the paper.]
Romeo. Stay, fellow; I can read. [He reads the paper.]
Scaring the ladies like a crowkeeper;
Ben. She will endite him to some supper.
To be to thee this night a torchbearer
Doth not she think me an old murtherer,
Enter PARIS and his PAGE, with flowers and sweet water.
Nurse. My fan, Peter.
Nurse. Peter!
Nurse. Ay, a thousand times. [Exit Romeo.] Peter!
mean to make bold withal, and, as you shall use me hereafter,
That we have had no time to move our daughter.
Madam, good night. Commend me to your daughter.
Receive in either by this dear encounter.
the fee simple of my life for an hour and a quarter.
Bal. It doth so, holy sir; and there's my master,
And never trouble Peter for the matter.
Lady Cap. What is the matter?
Was ever book containing such vile matter
Abram. No better.
a letter?
Mer. Any man that can write may answer a letter.
Or, if his mind be writ, give me his letter.
2. Mus. I say 'silver sound' because musicians sound for silver.
To beautify him only lacks a cover.
Romeo! humours! madman! passion! lover!
This precious book of love, this unbound lover,
Lady Cap. Verona's summer hath not such a flower.
Within the infant rind of this small flower
Romeo. Pink for flower.
Nurse. Nay, he's a flower, in faith- a very flower.
Marry, go before to field, he'll be your follower!
Poison hath residence, and medicine power;
From off the battlements of yonder tower,
And sails upon the bosom of the air.
Ere he can spread his sweet leaves to the air
Which is as thin of substance as the air,
That idles in the wanton summer air,
Being black puts us in mind they hide the fair.
Show me a mistress that is passing fair,
Where I may read who pass'd that passing fair?
She is too fair, too wise, wisely too fair,
With tender Juliet match'd, is now not fair.
Mer. Thou desirest me to stop in my tale against the hair.
Then mightst thou speak, then mightst thou tear thy hair,
To merit bliss by making me despair.
They pray; grant thou, lest faith turn to despair.
And bring thee cords made like a tackled stair,
One nickname for her purblind son and heir,
And young affection gapes to be his heir;
Death is my son-in-law, Death is my heir;
Samp. I do bite my thumb, sir.
thumb, sir.
Since you did leave it for my office, sir.
Greg. Do you quarrel, sir?
Samp. Well, sir.
Abram. Quarrel, sir? No, sir.
Cousin Cap. 'Tis more, 'tis more! His son is elder, sir;
Samp. Yes, better, sir.
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Abram. Do you bite your thumb at us, sir?
Bal. I dare not, sir.
Ser. I know not, sir.
Nurse. Here is a ring she bid me give you, sir.
Nurse. Now God in heaven bless thee! Hark you, sir.
Mer. Nay, an there were two such, we should have none shortly, for
Which you weep for.
That thou expects not nor I look'd not for.
Nurse. Marry, bachelor,
that the shoemaker should meddle with his yard and the tailor
But he, his own affections' counsellor,
So many thousand times? Go, counsellor!
Juliet. What's he that now is going out of door?
Mer. No, 'tis not so deep as a well, nor so wide as a church door;
Romeo. Come hither, man. I see that thou art poor.
O, she's rich in beauty; only poor
That I reviv'd and was an emperor.
Being a divine, a ghostly confessor,
Juliet. Good even to my ghostly confessor.
And yet, to my teen be it spoken, I have but four-
And steep'd in blood? Ah, what an unkind hour
I must hear from thee every day in the hour,
Bal. Full half an hour.
Nurse. Faith, I can tell her age unto an hour.
With Tybalt's slander- Tybalt, that an hour
Thee here in dark to be his paramour?
wall of any man or maid of Montague's.
And leave him all. Life, living, all is Death's.
Ser. My master's.
Ben. At this same ancient feast of Capulet's
to the plate. Good thou, save me a piece of marchpane and, as
an egg is full of meat; and yet thy head hath been beaten as
would spy out such a quarrel? Thy head is as full of quarrels as
I warrant, an I should live a thousand yeas,
Mer. O, thou art deceiv'd! I would have made it short; for I was
Nurse. Marry, farewell! I Pray you, Sir, what saucy merchant was
And strew this hungry churchyard with thy limbs.
These dead men's tombs.
then enter three or four CITIZENS with clubs.
their heads.
The vaulty heaven so high above our heads.
Is but a little way above our heads,
Samp. Ay, the heads of the maids, or their maidenheads.
Cap. O heavens! O wife, look how our daughter bleeds!
Green earthen pots, bladders, and musty seeds,
Juliet. Gallop apace, you fiery-footed steeds,
Greg. The heads of the maids?
[Enter NURSE with cords, wringing her hands.]
God join'd my heart and Romeo's, thou our hands;
And see how be will take it at your hands.
Second Ser. When good manners shall lie all in one or two men's hands,
On pain of torture, from those bloody hands
Juliet. Ay me! what news? Why dost thou wring thy hands
Juliet. Ay, madam, from the reach of these my hands.
Friar L. These violent delights have violent ends
Therefore we'll have some half a dozen friends,
To blaze your marriage, reconcile your friends,
Cold death aside and with the other sends
Tyb. What, art thou drawn among these heartless hinds?
Like damned guilty deeds to sinners' minds!
He swung about his head and cut the winds,
Play'd for a pair of stainless maidenhoods.
We have a trifling foolish banquet towards.
Now, nurse, what news? What hast thou there? the cords
Juliet. My ears have yet not drunk a hundred words
Juliet. Conceit, more rich in matter than in words,
Prince. This letter doth make good the Friar's words,
Do thou but close our hands with holy words,
Ben. Part, fools! [Beats down their swords.]
What mean these masterless and gory swords
That gallant spirit hath aspir'd the clouds,
Juliet. Is there no pity sitting in the clouds
When he bestrides the lazy-pacing clouds
Thank me no thankings, nor proud me no prouds,
To an impatient child that hath new robes
Signior Placentio and His lovely nieces;
It beats as it would fall in twenty pieces.
And reason coldly of your grievances,
Of breaches, ambuscadoes, Spanish blades,
Which once untangled much misfortune bodes
O'er lawyers' fingers, who straight dream on fees;
Juliet. Good father, I beseech you on my knees,
Ben. Come, he hath hid himself among these trees
Open the tomb, lay me with Juliet. [PARIS dies.]
That's by me wounded. Both our remedies
Within thy help and holy physic lies.
Hath Death lain with thy wife. See, there she lies,
And what obscur'd in this fair volume lies
So soon forsaken? Young men's love then lies
Else would I tear the cave where Echo lies,
O, mickle is the powerful grace that lies
In that dim monument where Tybalt lies.
Drawn with a team of little atomies
Juliet. No, madam; we have cull'd such necessaries
And Tybalt calls; and then on Romeo cries,
Tyb. Boy, this shall not excuse the injuries
Thou mayst prove false. At lovers' perjuries,
In plants, herbs, stones, and their true qualities;
What curious eye doth quote deformities?
Till we can clear these ambiguities
Examine other beauties.
For here lies Juliet, and her beauty makes
Drums in his ear, at which he starts and wakes,
It is some meteor that the sun exhales
She is the fairies' midwife, and she comes
Now, when the bridegroom in the morning comes
And there die strangled ere my Romeo comes?
Prince. Search, seek, and know how this foul murder comes.
Sharp misery had worn him to the bones;
Where for this many hundred years the bones
Is this the poultice for my aching bones?
O'ercover'd quite with dead men's rattling bones,
bench? O, their bones, their bones!
O woe, thy canopy is dust and stones
From forth the fatal loins of these two foes
Romeo. Not I, believe me. You have dancing shoes
And more inconstant than the wind, who wooes
Cap. Welcome, gentlemen! Ladies that have their toes
Romeo. More light and light- more dark and dark our woes!
And then will I be general of your woes
But the true ground of all these piteous woes
Maintains such falsehood, then turn tears to fires;
Here in the churchyard; yet I will adventure. [Retires.]
His looks I fear, and his intents I doubt. [Retires.]
[PARIS retires.]
JULIET rises.
Why should you fall into so deep an O?  [He rises]
Remnants of packthread, and old cakes of roses
Nor tears nor prayers shall purchase out abuses.
I will be deaf to pleading and excuses;
CITIZENS of Verona; KINSFOLK of both houses;
And soundly too. Your houses!
Or I shall faint. A plague o' both your houses!
Lovers can see to do their amorous rites
[PAGE whistes.]
Which oft the angry Mab with blisters plagues,
Down with the Capulets! Down with the Montagues!
Montagues.
(Being loose, unfirm, with digging up of graves)
Romeo. I fear, too early; for my mind misgives
And slay thy lady that in thy life lives,
More honourable state, more courtship lives
Lady Cap. That is because the traitor murderer lives.
And her immortal part with angels lives.
Of ill-shaped fishes; and about his shelves
Ben. This wind you talk of blows us from ourselves.
Like a poor prisoner in his twisted gyves,
Retain that dear perfection which he owes
A beggarly account of empty boxes,
Being purg'd, a fire sparkling in lovers' eyes;
Some say the lark and loathed toad chang'd eyes;
Need and oppression starveth in thine eyes,
Ben. By giving liberty unto thine eyes.
Nurse. I saw the wound, I saw it with mine eyes,
Mist-like infold me from the search of eyes.
Nor bide th' encounter of assailing eyes,
Unto the white-upturned wond'ring eyes
He lent me counsel, and I lent him eyes.
Romeo. How should they, when that wise men have no eyes?
Having some business, do entreat her eyes
Not truly in their hearts, but in their eyes.
Find written in the margent of his eyes,
I conjure thee by Rosaline's bright eyes.
And needly will be rank'd with other griefs,
Her wagon spokes made of long spinners' legs,
But every man betake him to his legs.
Go hence, to have more talk of these sad things;
Prince. A glooming peace this morning with it brings.
[He walks by them and sings.]
And therefore hath the wind-swift Cupid wings.
Mer. You are a lover. Borrow Cupid's wings
- Sirrah, fetch drier logs!
2 Ser. I have a head, sir, that will find out logs
Love is a smoke rais'd with the fume of sighs;
Adding to clouds more clouds with his deep sighs;
Sailing in this salt flood; the winds, thy sighs,
To comfort you. I wot well where he is.
and a kind, and a handsome; and, I warrant, a virtuous- Where is
To hear good counsel. O, what learning is!
Samp. Nay, as they dare. I will bite my thumb at them; which is
On this fair corse, and, as the custom is,
Romeo. Not mad, but bound more than a madman is;
Mer. No hare, sir; unless a hare, sir, in a lenten pie, that is
Nurse. Faith, here it is.
Still-waking sleep, that is not what it is
A peevish self-will'd harlotry it is.
Do ebb and flow with tears; the bark thy body is
Then, as the manner of our country is,
pricksong-keeps time, distance, and proportion; rests me his
I'll find those that shall. Scurvy knave! I am none of his
Pursu'd my humour, not Pursuing his,
Then be not poor, but break it and take this.
Cap. Send for the County. Go tell him of this.
Juliet. Tell me not, friar, that thou hear'st of this,
This love feel I, that feel no love in this.
Mont. O thou untaught! what manners is in this,
Which mannerly devotion shows in this;
Her Nurse is privy; and if aught in this
Prince. Then say it once what thou dost know in this.
Where's Romeo's man? What can he say in this?
shall find me a grave man. I am peppered, I warrant, for this
Nurse. What's this? what's this?
And doth it give me such a sight as this?
Never was seen so black a day as this.
This holy shrine, the gentle fine is this:
Cap. How, how, how, how, choplogic? What is this?
But, soft! what day is this?
Romeo. [aside] Shall I hear more, or shall I speak at this?
Forgetting any other home but this.
Romeo. How well my comfort is reviv'd by this!
Juliet. O, bid me leap, rather than marry Paris,
Mercutio's kinsman, noble County Paris!
If, rather than to marry County Paris
Romeo. She speaks.
I am too bold; 'tis not to me she speaks.
And she brings news; and every tongue that speaks
But soft! What light through yonder window breaks?
No nightingale. Look, love, what envious streaks
This is the hag, when maids lie on their backs,
Now comes the wanton blood up in your cheeks:
Is crimson in thy lips and in thy cheeks,
And fearest to die? Famine is in thy cheeks,
Hood my unmann'd blood, bating in my cheeks,
How? Will she none? Doth she not give us thanks?
Lady Cap. Ay, sir; but she will none, she gives you thanks.
Shall have the chinks.
Love goes toward love as schoolboys from their books;
Sirrah, go hire me twenty cunning cooks.
And she steal love's sweet bait from fearful hooks.
Alike bewitched by the charm of looks;
Culling of simples. Meagre were his looks,
Samp. Gregory, on my word, we'll not carry coals.
Tickle the senseless rushes with their heels;
From forth day's path and Titan's fiery wheels.
And flecked darkness like a drunkard reels
Juliet. How now? Who calls?
[They fight. TYBALT falls.]
[She stabs herself and falls].
Thy drugs are quick. Thus with a kiss I die. [He falls.]
Romeo. There is no world without Verona walls,
Romeo. With love's light wings did I o'erperch these walls;
Our instruments to melancholy bells,
So early waking- what with loathsome smells,
Driving back shadows over low'ring hills.
With reeky shanks and yellow chapless skulls;
A hall, a hall! give room! and foot it, girls.
Susan and she (God rest all Christian souls!)
Romeo. There is thy gold- worse poison to men's souls,
Which ten times faster glide than the sun's beams
Her collars, of the moonshine's wat'ry beams;
Mer. True, I talk of dreams;
man to bow in the hams.
Alack, alack, that heaven should practise stratagems
She will not stay the siege of loving terms,
Misshapen chaos of well-seeming forms!
Ben. Have you importun'd him by any means?
Enter FRIAR [LAURENCE] and PARIS, with Musicians.
Or, wanting that, with tears distill'd by moans.
Romeo. Not I; unless the breath of heartsick groans,
And made Verona's ancient citizens
Be shriv'd and married. Here is for thy pains.
Farewell. Be trusty, and I'll quit thy pains.
As with a club dash out my desp'rate brains?
on Juliet and shutting the curtains.]
[She falls upon her bed within the curtains.]
[NURSE goes to the curtains.]
Alack, alack, what blood is this which stains
As will disperse itself through all the veins
With purple fountains issuing from your veins!
I have a faint cold fear thrills through my veins
MUSICIANS waiting. SERVINGMEN come forth with napkins.
An alligator stuff'd, and other skins
[FRIAR stoops and looks on the blood and weapons.]
Romeo. Draw, Benvolio; beat down their weapons.
For I have need of many orisons
Among a sisterhood of holy nuns.
Show a fair presence and put off these frowns,
And that the lean abhorred monster keeps
3. Watchman. Here is a friar that trembles, sighs, and weeps.
Nurse. O, she says nothing, sir, but weeps and weeps;
And steal immortal blessing from her lips,
Friar L. A gentler judgment vanish'd from his lips-
To help me after? I will kiss thy lips.
And breath'd such life with kisses in my lips
That tips with silver all these fruit-tree tops-
Stands tiptoe on the misty mountain tops.
Straining harsh discords and unpleasing sharps.
Like softest music to attending ears!
Friar L. O, then I see that madmen have no ears.
Prince. What fear is this which startles in our ears?
his pitcher by the ears? Make haste, lest mine be about your ears
Thy old groans ring yet in mine ancient ears.
Which, as he breath'd defiance to my ears,
Where serpents are; chain me with roaring bears,
Environed with all these hideous fears,
The sun not yet thy sighs from heaven clears,
Being vex'd, a sea nourish'd with lovers' tears.
For Venus smiles not in a house of tears.
Paris. Poor soul, thy face is much abus'd with tears.
What, wilt thou wash him from his grave with tears?
How now, a conduit, girl? What, still in tears?
To stop the inundation of her tears,
I was your mother much upon these years
She hath not seen the change of fourteen years;
And since that time it is eleven years,
'Tis since the earthquake now eleven years;
O, by this count I shall be much in years
Cousin Cap. By'r Lady, thirty years.
Transparent heretics, be burnt for liars!
Romeo. Is it e'en so? Then I defy you, stars!
Some consequence, yet hanging in the stars,
Take him and cut him out in little stars,
The brightness of her cheek would shame those stars
And shake the yoke of inauspicious stars
their fingers.
Enter TYBALT and others.
Greg. No, for then we should be colliers.
Time out o' mind the fairies' coachmakers.
All forsworn, all naught, all dissemblers.
Enter SAMSON and GREGORY, of the house of Capulet, with swords and bucklers.
The cover, of the wings of grasshoppers;
Mine uncle Capulet, his wife, and daughters;
'Signior Martino and his wife and daughters;
County Anselmo and his beauteous sisters;
and all the GUESTS and GENTLEWOMEN to the Masquers.
With baleful weeds and precious-juiced flowers.
[PARIS strews the tomb with flowers.]
Exit TYBALT [with his followers].
And bakes the elflocks in foul sluttish, hairs,
Is guilty of this lamentable chance? The lady stirs.
Soon sleep in quiet. O, how my heart abhors
I must up-fill this osier cage of ours
Ben. It was. What sadness lengthens Romeo's hours?
Thou shalt continue two-and-forty hours,
Romeo. Well, what was yours?
Or shall I come to you at evening mass
Being held a foe, he may not have access
But my true love is grown to such excess
I should have been more strange, I must confess,
And she as much in love, her means much less
By having him making yourself no less.
Romeo. Art thou so bare and full of wretchedness
Romeo. O single-sold jest, solely singular for the singleness!
In this so sudden business.
To-night she's mew'd up to her heaviness.
One who, to put thee from thy heaviness,
Friar L. O deadly sin! O rude unthankfulness!
Is loathsome in his own deliciousness
And doleful dumps the mind oppress,
Farewell. Commend me to thy mistress.
So shall you share all that he doth possess,
And palm to palm is holy palmers' kiss.
To smooth that rough touch with a tender kiss.
The doors of breath, seal with a righteous kiss
Juliet. Feeling so the loss,
Juliet. Yet let me weep for such a feeling loss.
And, with a martial scorn, with one hand beats
And then dreams he of cutting foreign throats,
Forbid this bandying in Verona streets.
An you be not, hang, beg, starve, die in the streets,
Have thrice disturb'd the quiet of our streets
[Enter three or four SERVINGMEN with spits and logs and baskets.]
Ben. By my head, here come the Capulets.
Go, tell the Prince; run to the Capulets;
O, she is lame! Love's heralds should be thoughts,
Lifts me above the ground with cheerful thoughts.
Take our good meaning, for our judgment sits
Five times in that ere once in our five wits.
It strains me past the compass of my wits.
Of Tybalt deaf to peace, but that he tilts
Hath had no notice of these accidents;
Cast by their grave beseeming ornaments
To help me sort such needful ornaments
Apoth. My poverty but not my will consents.
If I did stay to look on his intents.
And madly play with my forefathers' joints,
His agile arm beats down their fatal points,
I'll make you quiet; what!- Cheerly, my hearts!
Stuff'd, as they say, with honourable parts,
Affliction is enanmour'd of thy parts,
Will they not hear? What, ho! you men, you beasts,
You'll make a mutiny among my guests!
1. Mus. An you re us and fa us, you note us.
1. Mus. What will you give us?
Mer. And but one word with one of us?
This doth not so, for she divideth us.
Or else depart. Here all eyes gaze on us.
That in thy likeness thou appear to us!
Juliet. What devil art thou that dost torment me thus?
Nurse. Your love says, like an honest gentleman, and a courteous,
Juliet. Can heaven be so envious?
Be not her maid, since she is envious.
Now, sir, her father counts it dangerous
Friar L. Hold! Get you gone, be strong and prosperous
That unsubstantial Death is amorous,
And a good lady, and a wise and virtuous.
Chorus.
Tyb. I am for you. [He draws.]
Alla stoccata carries it away. [He draws.]
O, pardon me for bringing these ill news,
O God, she comes! O honey nurse, what news?
If good, thou shamest the music of sweet news
Juliet. I would thou hadst my bones, and I thy news.
They'll be in scarlet straight at any news.
As yonder lady o'er her fellows shows.
While we were interchanging thrusts and blows,
These happy masks that kiss fair ladies' brows,
In tatt'red weeds, with overwhelming brows,
So shows a snowy dove trooping with crows
O, now be gone! More light and light it grows.
Whose misadventur'd piteous overthrows
Lady Cap. A fortnight and odd days.
For you and I are past our dancing days.
For in a minute there are many days.
Nurse. Go, girl, seek happy nights to happy days.
confines of a tavern, claps me his sword upon the table and says
Where is she? and how doth she! and what says
Juliet, the County stays.
Forth Ser. We cannot be here and there too. Cheerly, boys!
Peter. O, I cry you mercy! you are the singer. I will say  for you. It
Nor that is not the lark whose notes do beat
I would say thou hadst suck'd wisdom from thy teat.
Nurse. What?
Cap. Will you tell me that?
Romeo. This shall determine that.
She speaks, yet she says nothing. What of that?
What says he of our marriage? What of that?
Shall play the empire, arbitrating that
for coughing in the street, because he hath wakened thy dog that
Is thy news good or bad? Answer to that.
Romeo. Your plantain leaf is excellent for that.
Juliet. Madam, in happy time! What day is that?
Romeo. So shalt thou show me friendship. Take thou that.
Juliet. The tears have got small victory by that,
Ben. The what?
Romeo. Good heart, at what?
1 Ser. Things for the cook, sir; but I know not what.
This trick may chance to scathe you. I know what.
Her wagoner, a small grey-coated gnat,
Ben. I'll pay that doctrine, or else die in debt. 
O dear account! my life is my foe's debt.
And I will do it without fear or doubt,
Friar L. So smile the heavens upon this holy act
A sleeping potion, which so took effect
It is my will; the which if thou respect,
A greater power than we can contradict
Tybalt, liest thou there in thy bloody sheet?
May prove a beauteous flow'r when next we meet.
Since birth and heaven and earth, all three do meet
But passion lends them power, time means, to meet,
What is it else? A madness most discreet,
A Street.
Mantua. A street.
A street.
A street.
Temp'ring extremities with extreme sweet.
A choking gall, and a preserving sweet.
By any other name would smell as sweet.
Than twenty of their swords! Look thou but sweet,
Romeo. And I'll still stay, to have thee still forget,
Farewell. Thou canst not teach me to forget.
He that is strucken blind cannot forget
Is father, mother, Tybalt, Romeo, Juliet,
God forbid! Where's this girl? What, Juliet!
Lady Cap. Why, how now, Juliet?
Unless philosophy can make a Juliet,
He told me Paris should have married Juliet.
Romeo and Juliet
Or am I mad, hearing him talk of Juliet
Came to this vault to die, and lie with Juliet.
As that of true and faithful Juliet.
NURSE to Juliet.
Forgive me, cousin.' Ah, dear Juliet,
I came to talk of. Tell me, daughter Juliet,
Romeo, there dead, was husband to that Juliet;
Hath been my kinsman. O sweet Juliet,
I come from Lady Juliet.
One calls within, 'Juliet.'
Enter FRIAR LAURENCE alone, with a basket.
And I'll no longer be a Capulet.
Romeo. Is she a Capulet?
Ben. Tybalt, the kinsman to old Capulet,
On the fair daughter of rich Capulet;
Nay, sit, nay, sit, good cousin Capulet,
LADY CAPULET, wife to Capulet.
JULIET, daughter to Capulet.
SAMSON, servant to Capulet.
GREGORY, servant to Capulet.
TYBALT, nephew to Lady Capulet.
There shall no figure at such rate be set
Either be gone before the watch be set,
But look thou stay not till the watch be set,
Romeo. Then plainly know my heart's dear love is set
Juliet. Nurse, will you go with me into my closet
Without a sudden calm will overset
Of an old tear that is not wash'd off yet.
Thou art not conquer'd. Beauty's ensign yet
Romeo. I am too sore enpierced with his shaft
very pin of his heart cleft with the blind bow-boy's butt-shaft;
Shall Romeo by my letters know our drift;
Friar L. Be plain, good son, and homely in thy drift
Riddling confession finds but riddling shrift.
Let's see for means. O mischief, thou art swift
Mer. Right.
The County will be here with music straight,
And hire those horses. I'll be with thee straight.
O'er courtiers' knees, that dream on cursies straight;
Get me an iron crow and bring it straight
Of twenty men, it would dispatch you straight.
follow straight.
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
[They fight.]
Being but heavy, I will bear the light.
This vault a feasting presence full of light.
Check'ring the Eastern clouds with streaks of light;
Earth-treading stars that make dark heaven light.
And therefore thou mayst think my haviour light;
What torch is yond that vainly lends his light
Against to-morrow. My heart is wondrous light,
Romeo. A thousand times the worse, to want thy light!
Of limping Winter treads, even such delight
I am the drudge, and toil in your delight;
Shuts up his windows, locks fair daylight
And gave him what becomed love I might,
Come, gentle night; come, loving, black-brow'd night;
The horrible conceit of death and night,
Good night.
I thank you, honest gentlemen. Good night.
Lady Cap. Good night.
Ere one can say 'It lightens.' Sweet, good night!
Give me thy hand. 'Tis late. Farewell; good night.
Nurse. O Lord, I could have stay'd here all the night
That plats the manes of horses in the night
That he should hither come as this dire night
It seems she hangs upon the cheek of night
For thou wilt lie upon the wings of night
Spread thy close curtain, love-performing night,
Friar L. The grey-ey'd morn smiles on the frowning night,
That all the world will be in love with night
And makes himself an artificial night.
It best agrees with night. Come, civil night,
And never from this palace of dim night
Juliet. What man art thou that, thus bescreen'd in night,
Come, night; come, Romeo; come, thou day in night;
'Tis now near night.
At my poor house look to behold this night
For I ne'er saw true beauty till this night.
Among fresh female buds shall you this night
To scorn at our solemnity this night.
To be consorted with the humorous night.
Hark ye, your Romeo will be here at night.
But you shall bear the burthen soon at night.
Must be my convoy in the secret night.
That birds would sing and think it were not night.
fairly last night.
How silver-sweet sound lovers' tongues by night,
And in this state she 'gallops night by night
Will watch thy waking, and that very night
Our Romeo hath not been in bed to-night.
And hire posthorses. I will hence to-night.
Well, Juliet, I will lie with thee to-night.
Came he not home to-night?
Juliet. What satisfaction canst thou have to-night?
I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
For that which thou hast heard me speak to-night.
Romeo. I dreamt a dream to-night.
'Tis very late; she'll not come down to-night.
I have no joy of this contract to-night.
Friar L. Saint Francis be my speed! how oft to-night
What cursed foot wanders this way to-night
Juliet. O, find him! give this ring to my true knight
Of yonder knight?
Mont. Alas, my liege, my wife is dead tonight!
Was stay'd by accident, and yesternight
Or if not so, then here I hit it right-
Romeo. O, she doth teach the torches to burn bright!
Would through the airy region stream so bright
It rains downright.
Did my heart love till now? Forswear it, sight!
All in gore-blood. I swounded at the sight.
That one short minute gives me in her sight.
Romeo. I have night's cloak to hide me from their sight;
And cruel Death hath catch'd it from my sight!
O, if I wake, shall I not be distraught,
Samp. 'Tis all one. I will show myself a tyrant. When I have fought
I dreamt my master and another fought,
I will not entertain so bad a thought.
Unworthy as she is, that we have wrought
First Ser. You are looke't for and call'd for, ask't for and sought
When I, thy three-hours wife, have mangled it?
Paris. Thy face is mine, and thou hast sland'red it.
I hear thou must, and nothing may prorogue it,
They have made worms' meat of me. I have it,
Abate thy valour in the acting it.
Of dear import; and the neglecting it
Greg. They must take it in sense that feel it.
That cop'st with death himself to scape from it;
Prince. Give me the letter. I will look on it.
disgrace to them, if they bear it.
to hear it.
Romeo. Let me stand here till thou remember it.
To bear a poison, I would temper it-;
Her eye discourses; I will answer it.
Ben. Romeo will answer it.
Cap. Young Romeo is it?
Friar L. Who is it?
And she was wean'd (I never shall forget it),
Mer. Thou hast most kindly hit it.
Unless thou tell me how I may prevent it.
Juliet. I gave thee mine before thou didst request it;
salutation to your French slop. You gave us the counterfeit
Romeo. Well, in that hit you miss. She'll not be hit
Ben. A right fair mark, fair coz, is soonest hit.
And all this day an unaccustom'd spirit
Cap. So many guests invite as here are writ.
Lo, here upon thy cheek the stain doth sit
Upon his brow shame is asham'd to sit;
And wish his mistress were that kind of fruit
And then dreams he of smelling out a suit;
But now, my lord, what say you to my suit?
Thou wilt fall backward when thou hast more wit;
But much of grief shows still some want of wit.
2. Mus. Pray you put up your dagger, and put out your wit.
With Cupid's arrow. She hath Dian's wit,
Which should bedeck thy shape, thy love, thy wit.
Fie, fie, thou shamest thy shape, thy love, thy wit,
and crush a cup of wine. Rest you merry! Exit.
Do as thou wilt, for I have done with thee. Exit.
Nurse. Marry, I will; and this is wisely done. Exit.
Hie you, make haste, for it grows very late. Exit.
[Exit.]
With speedy help doth lend redress.' [Exit.]
Friar J. Brother, I'll go and bring it thee. [Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
For well you know this is a pitiful case. [Exit.]
Till then, adieu, and keep this holy kiss. [Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
[Exit.]
The day is broke; be wary, look about. [Exit.]
The life of Tybalt.
Signior Valentio and His cousin Tybalt;
and is he a man to encounter Tybalt?
Ben. Why, what is Tybalt?
Ben. There lies that Tybalt.
A Follower. Away Tybalt.
Take it in what sense thou wilt.
for tying his new shoes with an old riband? And yet thou wilt
Or my true heart with treacherous revolt
Shall I not then be stifled in the vault,
And threat'ned me with death, going in the vault,
Friar L. Go with me to the vault.
Came I to take her from her kindred's vault;
I saw her laid low in her kindred's vault
Thou shalt be borne to that same ancient vault
Full soon the canker death eats up that plant.
And where the worser is predominant,
Sleep for a week; for the next night, I warrant,
Is very good meat in Lent;
And know their spring, their head, their true descent;
Many for many virtues excellent,
Piteous predicament!
Examine every married lineament,
For though fond nature bids us all lament,
Brags of his substance, not of ornament.
Here in my house do him disparagement.
Romeo. O, thou wilt speak again of banishment.
And turn'd that black word death to banishment.
When theirs are dry, for Romeo's banishment.
Not body's death, but body's banishment.
Is death misterm'd. Calling death 'banishment,'
And world's exile is death. Then 'banishment'
Much more than death. Do not say 'banishment.'
What I have spoke; but farewell compliment!
Yet nature's tears are reason's merriment.
Each part, depriv'd of supple government,
It burneth in the Capels' monument.
To this same place, to this same monument.
With open outcry, toward our monument.
Her body sleeps in Capel's monument,
Juliet. Wash they his wounds with tears? Mine shall be spent,
something stale and hoar ere it be spent
When it hoars ere it be spent.
None but for some, and yet all different.
Friar L. Hold, then. Go home, be merry, give consent
And see how one another lends content;
As that is desperate which we would prevent.
Mer. Come between us, good Benvolio! My wits faint.
Will ne'er wear out the everlasting flint.
By heaven, I will tear thee joint by joint
Come to redeem me? There's a fearful point!
Who, all as hot, turns deadly point to point,
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[Exeunt.]
[They march about the stage and exeunt.]
Are made already mothers. By my count,
Lady Cap. You are too hot.
And quench the fire, the room is grown too hot.
For it excels your first; or if it did not,
I fear it is; and yet methinks it should not,
Samp. Fear me not.
Therefore farewell. I see thou knowest me not.
Mer. By my heel, I care not.
Romeo. Nay, good goose, bite not!
He heareth not, he stirreth not, be moveth not;
Friar L. Peace, ho, for shame! Confusion's cure lives not
That after-hours with sorrow chide us not!
For here we need it not.
Uneven is the course; I like it not.
In all respects by me; nay more, I doubt it not.
This is dear mercy, and thou seest it not.
Lady Cap. We will have vengeance for it, fear thou not.
'Proud'- and 'I thank you'- and 'I thank you not'-
Nurse. I know not.
That I yet know not?
were lustier than he is, and twenty such jacks; and if I cannot,
Here comes the lady. O, so light a foot
What's Montague? it is nor hand, nor foot,
And what love can do, that dares love attempt.
Which the commission of thy years and art
And the place death, considering who thou art,
O, speak again, bright angel! for thou art
Art thou a man? Thy form cries out thou art;
Mer. Why, is not this better now than groaning for love? Now art
Mer. Without his roe, like a dried herring. O flesh, flesh, how art
Then gave I her - so tutored by my art -
Being tasted, slays all senses with the heart.
Howling attends it! How hast thou the heart,
Romeo. A torch for me! Let wantons light of heart
But woo her, gentle Paris, get her heart;
Juliet. Speak'st thou this from thy heart?
And yet no man like he doth grieve my heart.
God pardon him! I do, with all my heart;
As Paris hath. Beshrew my very heart,
My will to her consent is but a part.
Came more and more, and fought on part and part,
For this, being smelt, with that part cheers each part;
Till the Prince came, who parted either part.
Nor arm, nor face, nor any other part
Once more, on pain of death, all men depart.
Romeo. Not having that which having makes them short.
Friar L. On Thursday, sir? The time is very short.
Paris. Thou wrong'st it more than tears with that report.
Your looks are pale and wild and do import
At some hours in the night spirits resort-
fiddlestick; here's that shall make you dance. Zounds, consort!
My very friend, hath got this mortal hurt
Mer. I am hurt.
Ben. What, art thou hurt?
Of this sir-reverence love, wherein thou stick'st
Just opposite to what thou justly seem'st-
And I will take thy word. Yet, if thou swear'st,
Sups the fair Rosaline whom thou so lov'st;
Peer'd forth the golden window of the East,
Do lace the severing clouds in yonder East.
The unreasonable fury of a beast.
An ill-beseeming semblance for a feast.
This night I hold an old accustom'd feast,
Our wedding cheer to a sad burial feast;
This night you shall behold him at our feast.
That I will show you shining at this feast,
Friar L. I am the greatest, able to do least,
With piercing steel at bold Mercutio's breast;
Romeo. Sleep dwell upon thine eyes, peace in thy breast!
-God save the mark!- here on his manly breast.
Of a despised life, clos'd in my breast,
Griefs of mine own lie heavy in my breast,
Come to thy heart as that within my breast!
Friar L. Wisely, and slow. They stumble that run fast.
Was that my father that went hence so fast?
that hath a hair more or a hair less in his beard than thou hast.
From this world-wearied flesh. Eyes, look your last!
Else, when he is found, that hour is his last.
As Phaeton would whip you to the West
Romeo. I thought all for the best.
Ben. Away, be gone; the sport is at the best.
And she shall scant show well that now seems best.
Where should she be? How oddly thou repliest!
it begins with some other letter; and she hath the prettiest
Look to't, think on't; I do not use to jest.
Mer. I will bite thee by the ear for that jest.
Is she not proud? Doth she not count her blest,
My fingers itch. Wife, we scarce thought us blest
Friar L. I hear some noise. Lady, come from that nest
Good night, good night! As sweet repose and rest
That calls our person from our morning rest?
Will I set up my everlasting rest
Would I were sleep and peace, so sweet to rest!
The County Paris hath set up his rest
I'll to my rest.
Rom. Ay, so I fear; the more is my unrest.
Which thou wilt propagate, to have it prest
Tyb. It fits when such a villain is a guest.
Whereto I have invited many a guest,
No warmth, no breath, shall testify thou livest;
Greg. I will frown as I pass by, and let them take it as they list.
Spare not for cost.
O, look! methinks I see my cousin's ghost
The precious treasure of his eyesight lost.
Pet. Pretty too! What say you, James Soundpost?
Death lies on her like an untimely frost
Nurse. There's no trust,
Romeo. Out-
her sometimes, and tell her that Paris is the properer man; but
Her chariot is an empty hazelnut,
ere it be out.
Juliet. Then, window, let day in, and let life out.
Turn back, dull earth, and find thy centre out.
For stony limits cannot hold love out,
Friar J. Going to find a barefoot brother out,
Through fair Verona; find those persons out
Go, sirrah, trudge about
Beshrew your heart for sending me about
To see now how a jest shall come about!
She could have run and waddled all about;
Cap. Tush, I will stir about,
Bal. [aside] For all this same, I'll hide me hereabout.
I'll warrant you, when I say so, she looks as pale as any clout
And bid her (mark you me?) on Wednesday next-
Paris. That may be must be, love, on Thursday next.
But fettle your fine joints 'gainst Thursday next
Friar L. That's a certain text.
I hear some noise within. Dear love, adieu!
Dry sorrow drinks our blood. Adieu, adieu!
Mer. Nay, if our wits run the wild-goose chase, I am done; for thou
Arms, take your last embrace! and, lips, O you
quivers. Scurvy knave! Pray you, sir, a word; and, as I told you,
but 'tis enough, 'twill serve. Ask for me to-morrow, and you
That he dares ne'er come back to challenge you;
Bal. I will be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Nurse. Out upon you! What a man are you!
Romeo. Good morrow to you both. What counterfeit did I give you?
Gentlemen, good den. A word with one of you.
To beg your pardon. Pardon, I beseech you!
everything in extremity. I must hence to wait. I beseech you
Nurse. Madam, your mother craves a word with you.
Nurse. If you be he, sir, I desire some confidence with you.
Mer. O, then I see Queen Mab hath been with you.
And let the nurse this night sit up with you;
Unplagu'd with corns will have a bout with you.
Ser. Perhaps you have learned it without book. But I pray, can you
Lady Cap. Well, think of marriage now. Younger than you,
But, an you will not wed, I'll pardon you.
And yet 'not proud'? Mistress minion you,
Romeo. And trust me, love, in my eye so do you.
Juliet. To answer that, I should confess to you.
Samp. If you do, sir, am for you. I serve as good a man as you.
And presently took post to tell it you.
Romeo. I will follow you.
Henceforward I am ever rul'd by you.
as another man, if I see occasion in a good quarrel, and the law
Taking thy part, hath rush'd aside the law,
Apoth. Such mortal drugs I have; but Mantua's law
The world is not thy friend, nor the world's law;
Unto the rigour of severest law.
That thou hast done me; therefore turn and draw.
Samp. I mean, an we be in choler, we'll draw.
Should in the farthest East bean to draw
Most miserable hour that e'er time saw
Cap. When the sun sets the air doth drizzle dew,
Which with sweet water nightly I will dew,
With tears augmenting the fresh morning's dew,
Ben. Alas that love, so gentle in his view,
Paris. Sweet flower, with flowers thy bridal bed I strew.
[Enter JULIET above at a window.]
[She goeth down from the window.]
Enter ROMEO and JULIET aloft at the window.
By holy marriage. When, and where, and how
Were thinly scattered, to make up a show.
Compare her face with some that I shall show,
Despised substance of divinest show!
Couple it with something; make it a word and a blow.
Samp. Draw, if you be men. Gregory, remember thy swashing blow.
Methinks I see thee, now thou art below,
Doth grace for grace and love for love allow.
Ben. Am I like such a fellow?
Live, and be prosperous; and farewell, good fellow.
Whipp'd and tormented and- God-den, good fellow.
Too swift arrives as tardy as too slow.
Are you at leisure, holy father, now,
Friar L. My leisure serves me, pensive daughter, now.
Cap. No, not a whit. What, I have watch'd ere now
Romeo. I pray thee chide not. She whom I love now
She I'll swear hath corns. Am I come near ye now?
But I will watch you from such watching now.
Juliet. A rhyme I learnt even now
'An if a man did need a poison now
And fall upon the ground, as I do now,
What, not a word? You take your pennyworths now!
Mer. 'Tis no less, I tell ye; for the bawdy hand of the dial is now
And fire-ey'd fury be my conduct now!
Do I live dead that live to tell it now.
She is not fourteen. How long is it now
Uncomfortable time, why cam'st thou now
1. Mus. Not a dump we! 'Tis no time to play now.
Nurse. Ah, mocker! that's the dog's name. R is for the - No; I know
We would as willingly give cure as know.
For even the day before, she broke her brow;
'Tis but the pale reflex of Cynthia's brow;
And yet, I warrant, it bad upon it brow
And I will make thee think thy swan a crow.
Could we but learn from whence his sorrows grow,
That I shall say good night till it be morrow.
Thy purpose marriage, send me word to-morrow,
As are behooffull for our state to-morrow.
Get you to bed! Faith, you'll be sick to-morrow
Juliet. At what o'clock to-morrow
To marry Paris. Wednesday is to-morrow.
Lady Cap. I will, and know her mind early to-morrow;
As you think fit to furnish me tomorrow?
Paris. My lord, I would that Thursday were tomorrow.
Cap. Go, nurse, go with her. We'll to church tomorrow.
Good night, good night! Parting is such sweet sorrow,
Shake, quoth the dovehouse! 'Twas no need, I trow,
Are you so hot? Marry come up, I trow.
We met, we woo'd, and made exchange of vow,
She hath forsworn to love, and in that vow
Thy noble shape is but a form of wax
As all the world- why he's a man of wax.
Wilt thou not, Jule?' It stinted, and said 'Ay.'
And, pretty fool, it stinted, and said 'Ay.'
The pretty wretch left crying, and said 'Ay.'
To think it should leave crying and say 'Ay.'
Dost thou love me, I know thou wilt say 'Ay';
Samp. [aside to GREGORY] Is the law of our side if I say ay?
Night's candles are burnt out, and jocund day
I married them; and their stol'n marriage day
Nurse. She's dead, deceas'd; she's dead! Alack the day!
Welcome, gentlemen! I have seen the day
Hunting thee hence with hunt's-up to the day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Nurse. O lamentable day!
Prepare her, wife, against this wedding day.
O son, the night before thy wedding day
Lady Cap. Accurs'd, unhappy, wretched, hateful day!
O day! O day! O day! O hateful day!
Nurse. O woe? O woful, woful, woful day!
O woful day! O woful day!
Most lamentable day, most woful day
Juliet. Wilt thou be gone? It is not yet near day.
Not yet enjoy'd. So tedious is this day
Of all the days of the year, upon that day;
How is't, my soul? Let's talk; it is not day.
We waste our lights in vain, like lamps by day.
Nurse. Look, look! O heavy day!
Lady Mont. O, where is Romeo? Saw you him to-day?
That thou consent to marry us to-day.
Nurse. Have you got leave to go to shrift to-day?
I tell thee what- get thee to church a Thursday
And there an end. But what say you to Thursday?
immortal passado! the punto reverse! the hay.
And all my fortunes at thy foot I'll lay
Of her awaking, here untimely lay
Mer. I mean, sir, in delay
The excuse that thou dost make in this delay
You are welcome, gentlemen! Come, musicians, play.
pump, that, when the single sole of it is worn, the jest may
I'll frown, and be perverse, and say thee nay,
Enter several of both houses, who join yhe fray;
Prince. Where are the vile beginners of this fray?
Right glad I am he was not at this fray.
Prince. Benvolio, who began this bloody fray?
Since arm from arm that voice doth us affray,
I'll tell thee as we pass; but this I pray,
Happiness courts thee in her best array;
Nurse! Wife! What, ho! What, Nurse, I say!
Make haste, I say.
Whose names are written there, and to them say,
3. Mus. Faith, I know not what to say.
Nurse. Is your man secret? Did you ne'er hear say,
Stay not, be gone. Live, and hereafter say
Lies fest'ring in his shroud; where, as they say,
Upon a rapier's point. Stay, Tybalt, stay!
Ben. Tybalt, here slain, whom Romeo's hand did stay.
My house and welcome on their pleasure stay.
Come, go, good Juliet. I dare no longer stay.
Ben. Why dost thou stay?
Mont. I would thou wert so happy by thy stay
Romeo. 'Tis the way
Watchman. [within.] Lead, boy. Which way?
Hie you to church; I must another way,
If thou art taken. Hence, be gone, away!
Juliet. It is, it is! Hie hence, be gone, away!
First Ser. Where's Potpan, that he helps not to take away?
Hath thwarted our intents. Come, come away.
Two may keep counsel, putting one away?
Hast thou met with him? Send thy man away.
A madman's mercy bid thee run away.
To hear true shrift. Come, madam, let's away.
O sweet my mother, cast me not away!
Juliet. Go, get thee hence, for I will not away.
For this time all the rest depart away.
Therefore, if thou art moved, thou runn'st away.
That she do give her sorrow so much sway,
thou sociable, now art thou Romeo; now art thou what thou art, by
Ben. Tut! you saw her fair, none else being by,
Romeo. What shall I swear by?
That we may call it early by-and-by.
Second Ser. Ay, boy, ready.
Make haste! The bridegroom he is come already:
I must needs wake you. Lady! lady! lady!
[singing] lady, lady, lady.
Go before, nurse. Commend me to thy lady,
Romeo. Commend me to thy lady.
Some aqua-vitae, ho! My lord! my lady!
And, if thou dar'st, I'll give thee remedy.
If what thou speak'st speak not of remedy.
I'll to the friar to know his remedy.
Evermore showring? In one little body
Seeking out Romeo, that did spit his body
I charge thee in the Prince's name obey.
foot, and a body, though they be not to be talk'd on, yet they
Which, as they kiss, consume. The sweetest honey
Or shall we on without apology?
Adversity's sweet milk, philosophy,
Romeo. Yet 'banished'? Hang up philosophy!
Mer. Well said! Follow me this jest now till thou hast worn out thy
Friar L. O woeful sympathy!
Peter. I will then give it you soundly.
Mer. Yea, is the worst well? Very well took, i' faith! wisely,
wisely.
And bring in cloudy night immediately.
And, as he fell, did Romeo turn and fly.
Than your consent gives strength to make it fly.
This may flies do, when I from this must fly;
Cap. Things have fall'n out, sir, so unluckily
AN OLD MAN, of the Capulet family.
Though news be sad, yet tell them merrily;
Enter NURSE hastily
Romeo. This gentleman, the Prince's near ally,
If thou dost love, pronounce it faithfully.
Cap. God's bread I it makes me mad. Day, night, late, early,
Is she not down so late, or up so early?
Look you, she lov'd her kinsman Tybalt dearly,
A perilous knock; and it cried bitterly.
It may be thought we held him carelessly,
And with this knife I'll help it presently.
Sev. Madam, the guests are come, supper serv'd up, you call'd, my
Samp. No, sir, I do not bite my thumb at you, sir; but I bite my
Greg. [aside to SAMPSON] Say 'better.' Here comes one of my
minstrels of us, look to hear nothing but discords. Here's my
That I must love a loathed enemy.
To sunder his that was thine enemy?
I have been feasting with mine enemy,
The only son of your great enemy.
Juiet. 'Tis but thy name that is my enemy.
In what vile part of this anatomy
Staying for thine to keep him company.
At home, abroad, alone, in company,
Is my dear son with such sour company.
I promise you, but for your company,
That he shall soon keep Tybalt company;
Rememb'ring how I love thy company.
Fain would I dwell on form- fain, fain deny
From ancient grudge break to new mutiny,
Nurse. No, truly, sir; not a penny.
Romeo. Wilt thou provoke me? Then have at thee, boy!
With twenty hundred thousand times more joy
What say'st thou? Hast thou not a word of joy?
It cannot countervail the exchange of joy
Hath sorted out a sudden day of joy
When but love's shadows are so rich in joy.
Which you, mistaking, offer up to joy.
Now I have stain'd the childhood of our joy
Romeo. Ah, Juliet, if the measure of thy joy
Which to the high topgallant of my joy
And turns it to exile. There art thou happy.
come to the whole depth of my tale, and meant indeed to occupy
Being holiday, the beggar's shop is shut. What, ho! apothecary!
Here's to my love! [He drinks.] O true apothecary!
I do remember an apothecary,
[Exeunt all but the NURSE and Musicians, casting rosemary
Dry up your tears and stick your rosemary
And all things change them to the contrary.
Juliet. What storm is this that blows so contrary?
Ben. Here were the servants of your adversary
We cannot without circumstance descry.
The day to cheer and night's dank dew to dry,
this that was so full of his ropery?
Romeo. Ay, mine own fortune in my misery.
minim rest, one, two, and the third in your bosom! the very
Mer. But I'll be hang'd, sir, if he wear your livery.
So far from sounding and discovery,
That book in many's eyes doth share the glory,
But O, it presses to my memory
That in gold clasps locks in the golden story;
But if thou, jealous, dost return to pry
Ser. Ye say honestly. Rest you merry!
Which is the god of my idolatry,
Nurse. They call for dates and quinces in the pastry.
Thy dear love sworn but hollow perjury,
Begot of nothing but vain fantasy;
Mer. Nay, I am the very pink of courtesy.
case as mine a man may strain courtesy.
better love to berhyme her), Dido a dowdy, Cleopatra a gypsy,
Romeo. Meaning, to cursy.
May be put from her by society.
Banish'd the new-made bridegroom from this city;
But Romeo may not. More validity,
And thou art wedded to calamity.
And I am proof against their enmity.
Poor sacrifices of our enmity!
And yet not fall; so light is vanity.
O heavy lightness! serious vanity!
Away to heaven respective lenity,
Two households, both alike in dignity,
To murther, murther our solemnity?
To fleer and scorn at our solemnity?
I will omit no opportunity
Cuts beauty off from all posterity.
It back to Tybalt, whose dexterity
For beauty, starv'd with her severity,
Ben. The date is out of such prolixity.
Will now deny to dance? She that makes dainty,
This is as't should be. Let me see the County.
I think it best you married with the County.
On Thursday next be married to this County.
To prison, eyes; ne'er look on liberty!
So loving-jealous of his liberty.
His son is thirty.
Think true love acted simple modesty.
Not stepping o'er the bounds of modesty.
Who, even in pure and vestal modesty,
Hath had no power yet upon thy beauty.
Ben. An I were so apt to quarrel as thou art, any man should buy
Farewell, my coz.
